Title: VALD: Multi-Stage Vision Attack Detection for Efficient LVLM Defense

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.19570v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Feb 2026 02:52:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# VALD: Multi-Stage Vision Attack Detection for Efficient LVLM Defense 

Nadav Kadvil, Ayellet Tal 

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 

kadviln@campus.technion.ac.il , ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il 

Abstract 

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) can be vulnerable to adversarial images that subtly bias their outputs toward plausible yet incorrect responses. We introduce a general, efficient, and training-free defense that combines image transformations with agentic data consolida-tion to recover correct model behavior. A key component of our approach is a two-stage pre-detection mechanism that quickly filters out the majority of clean inputs. We first assess image consistency under content-preserving transfor-mations at negligible computational cost. For more challenging cases, we examine discrep-ancies in a text-embedding space. Only when necessary do we invoke a powerful LLM to re-solve attack-induced divergences. A key idea is to consolidate multiple responses, leveraging both their similarities and their differences. We show that our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy while maintaining notable efficiency: most clean images skip costly processing, and even in the presence of numerous adversarial examples, the overhead remains minimal. 

1 Introduction 

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in a wide range of tasks, including text-to-image generation (Al-habeeb and Al-Shargabi, 2024; Rombach et al., 2022) and image-grounded text generation, such as image captioning (Yin et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023) and visual question answering (Huynh et al., 2025; Caffagni et al., 2024; Kuang et al., 2025). However, these models are vulnerable to visual ad-versarial attacks, when imperceptible perturbations are added to input images to manipulate model re-sponses or generate harmful responses (Liu et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2024). Moreover, the widespread use of publicly available LVLMs and pre-trained visual encoders like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) gives adversaries gray-box access, making adversarial attacks easier to carry out. Therefore, the need to adopt defense mechanisms becomes more prevalent. Adversarial defense research for LVLMs has pri-marily focused on safety alignment issues, such as identifying and preventing harmful and prohib-ited outputs like encouraging criminal behavior (Pi et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024). These defenses often adapt safety mechanisms de-veloped for LLMs, including assessing model re-sponses (Pi et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2024) or learn-ing defense prompts (Mo et al., 2024). However, such methods do not address attacks that subtly steer the model toward benign but incorrect out-puts, as demonstrated in Figure 1. Methods that do address this challenge can be broadly categorized into three approaches. The first involves detecting adversarial inputs and dis-regarding them upon detection (Zhang et al., 2023, 2024; Fares et al., 2024). The second approach is adversarial training, in which the visual back-bone is fine-tuned using adversarial examples to im-prove robustness against such inputs (Schlarmann et al., 2024). The third approach, introduced in SmoothVLM (Sun et al., 2024), suggests query-ing the LVLM with both the adversarial image and multiple transformed versions of it. An LLM acts as a judge, compares the captions and chooses one. (Zhou et al., 2024) recently extended this approach to correct errors at multiple stages of the algorithm. We adopt the latter approach, but tackle two key challenges that limit the original method’s effi-ciency. First, the method’s effectiveness depends on the use of powerful LVLMs. This may limit the applications that can use the approach and, in addi-tion, results in significant computational overhead. Second, generating and assessing every caption (of the transformed images) individually is not only computationally expensive but also unnecessary in the absence of an adversarial attack. This makes the approach impractical for real world use, in which most images are not attacked.   

> arXiv:2602.19570v1 [cs.CV] 23 Feb 2026 Figure 1: LVLM Defense. Given an adversarial image designed to subtly steer the model toward benign but incorrect outputs, our goal is to produce the correct response (e.g., caption) for the input.

We observe a trade-off between runtime and the risk of overlooking adversarial images. The LLM used for caption consolidation achieves high ac-curacy but incurs a significant computational cost. Using lighter tools reduces computational demands, but at the expense of accuracy. Therefore, we pro-pose a model that detects most adversarial images early on, leaving only the most challenging cases for the expensive LLM to resolve. This lightweight adversarial pre-detection step relies on the observation that, while accurately iden-tifying adversarial images is difficult, determining whether an image is likely clean is a much sim-pler task. It only needs to check whether an image (or caption) and its transformations behave as ex-pected for clean images. In other words, we allow false positives, i.e. misclassifying a clean image as adversarial, but not false negatives. We break this early detection into two tasks, or-dered by increasing computational cost. First, for an image to be considered clean, its embeddings must remain consistent across a set of content-preserving transformations. Notably, this check requires almost no additional computation, since it is performed as part of the embedding comparison between the original and transformed images. If the image is deemed non-adversarial at this stage, the expensive caption-generation and consolidation steps are skipped, and the response for the input image is used directly. 95% clean images are iden-tified at this stage. Then, in a second stage, we examine the re-sponses produced for the input image and its trans-formations. Discrepancies in the text-embedding space provide evidence that a successful attack has occurred. We show that this can be accomplished using only lightweight LVLMs. Only then do we rely on a powerful LLM, using it solely for consolidating the multiple responses (e.g., captions). By decoupling the visual-questioning task from the information-consolidation process, we enable the use of lightweight LVLMs in the preceding stage. By in-structing the model to focus on consistent elements across the LVLM outputs, such as identifying the main objects in the image and their interactions, we are able to filter out divergences introduced by ad-versarial attacks. We note that the set of responses for the remaining inputs is already available, as it is required in the previous stage. A major benefit of our method is its generality— it can defend against a wide variety of attacks. It does not depend on how the image was perturbed; therefore, even attacks optimized specifically for the target model can be handled effectively. Hence, we make three key contributions: (1) Introducing a general and efficient training-free adversarial defense for LVLMs, based on image transformations and agentic data consolidation. Its efficiency stems from a two-stage pre-detection process that filters out most clean images. It can handle a wide variety of attacks. (2) An additional contribution is a lightweight de-tection mechanism, which can be integrated with other defense approaches. (3) We show that our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and efficiency. It is especially efficient when the number of attacked images is small, since most clean images bypass the heavier processing. Even when many adversarial images are present, the additional computational cost remains minimal. 

2 Related Work 

Our work lies at the intersection of two key chal-lenges in LVLM research: detecting adversarial attacks and defending against them. Before review-ing prior work in these areas, we first review the nature of adversarial attacks themselves. 

Adversarial attacks on LVLMs. Adversarial strategies targeting the vision modality, the fo-cus of this paper, can be broadly categorized into jailbreaking attacks and misleading attacks. Jail-breaking attacks aim to bypass safety alignment by exploiting the visual channel, eliciting prohib-ited, toxic, or otherwise harmful content from an LVLM (Qi et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2024; Bailey et al., 2023). Misleading attacks, in contrast, per-turb the visual modality to induce factually incor-rect but seemingly benign outputs. Such attacks cause the model to hallucinate nonexistent objects, misclassify visual elements, or fundamentally mis-interpret the scene (Tu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025). We refer the reader to excellent surveys that provide a com-prehensive overview of vision-based adversarial attacks (Liu et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025). This work focuses on the second category, mis-leading attacks. These attacks are distinguished by the attacker’s level of access to the model and are typically classified as white-box, gray-box, or black-box attacks (Liu et al., 2025). White-box attacks assume full access to the model’s parame-ters and gradients. Gray-box attacks assume access to specific components, such as the vision encoder (e.g., CLIP). Black-box attacks rely solely on query access (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of internal parameters. This paper presents defense results against two representative attacks: MF-ii (Zhao et al., 2023) and MixAttack (Tu et al., 2023). MF-ii synthe-sizes a target image from the target text and then matches the visual features of the source and target images. MixAttack, in contrast, directly matches the textual features of the target text to the visual features of the source image using CLIP. We chose these attacks because, from a vision perspective, they are white-box (i.e., they have access to the vi-sion encoder parameters, although not to all LVLM parameters), making them strong attacks. 

Adversarial attack detection for LVLMs. The goal of detection is to determine whether an input has been attacked. In LVLM settings, some detec-tion methods operate leverage internal representa-tions (Zhang et al., 2024) and some monitor the model’s output behavior (Zhang et al., 2023; Fares et al., 2024). These detectors have been primarily studied for jailbreak-oriented attacks. Our work operates both at the embedding level (within the visual encoder) and at the output level (via consistency checks on generated responses). 

Adversarial defenses for LVLMs. Complemen-tary to detection, adversarial defense aims to ensure that the model remains robust in the presence of attacks, preserving or restoring the correctness of its responses. Existing LVLM defenses have pri-marily focused on jailbreaking, leveraging safety prompts (Gou et al., 2024), policy-trained align-ment layers (Ding et al., 2024), or response filters to block overtly harmful content (Pi et al., 2024). In contrast, defenses against misleading attacks, where the output remains benign yet semantically incorrect, have received comparatively less atten-tion. These defenses can be broadly grouped into training-based and training-free methods. Training-based approaches aim to improve model robustness through specialized training procedures (Schlar-mann et al., 2024). In contrast, training-free de-fenses operate at inference time without modifying model weights (Sun et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Nie et al., 2022). Our work focuses on this latter category, providing a complementary approach to safety-alignment methods. 

3 Method 

Our method is motivated by two key observations. First, applying image transformations to adver-sarial images often produces noisy and inconsis-tent captions, as descriptions may refer to either the original content or the perturbation; however, the consistent elements across captions remain an-chored in the true image content. Second, the sen-sitivity of adversarial attacks to image transforma-tions can be exploited for both detection and de-fense. By integrating these two components, we minimize computational overhead. Building on these observations, we introduce the 

VALD framework. As shown in Figure 2, it com-prises four stages: early attack detection, image based response generation, late-stage adversarial detection, and response generation. While the first three stages focus on detection, efficiently identify-ing the vast majority of clean images and removing them from further processing, the final stage is re-sponsible for defending the remaining images. 

The early attack detection. Given an input im-age x, which may be either clean or adversarial, the task is to determine whether x is suspected as adversarial. While identifying adversarial images accurately is a complex task, the early attack de-tection mechanism has a simpler goal—identifying whether the image is behaving as expected from clean images. In other words, we allow errors in classifying a clean image as adversarial, but not in Figure 2: Architecture. The input image x, which may be clean (green) or adversarial (red), undergoes various transformations. The early detection gets as input the input image and its transformations and determines whether x      

> is suspected as adversarial. If the image is suspected to be adversarial, the LVLM is queried independently on the image and its transformations (solid red arrow) using the original instruction, producing a response set Rthat is then processed in the late detection phase. Otherwise, the defense process is bypassed, and the LVLM is queried only with the original image (solid green arrow). The late detection phase receives Ras input and determines whether the image has been attacked by analyzing the textual embedding space. If no attack is detected, only the response generated from the original input image is used as the final output. If an attack is detected, an LLM-based consolidation process is applied to Rto generate the final correct response as part of the defense.

the opposite direction. The key idea is that, for an image to be con-sidered clean, it must yield similar embeddings to a set of content-preserving transformations. We consider content preserving transformations as op-erations that do not significantly alter the image’s core semantics. Within this set, we use large crops and random pixel masking in this work. To implement this idea, we first generate a small set of K content-preserving transforma-tions {Tk(x)}Kk=1 . Next, we compute the em-beddings for the input image and its transforma-tions, z(x), z (T1(x)) , . . . , z (TK (x)) , using a sin-gle batched pass through the LVLM’s vision en-coder. Finally, we compute the distance between the transformed image embeddings and the source embedding and compare it to a predefined thresh-old τ . If the average distance is below τ , the image is considered clean. Empirically, clean inputs pro-duce highly similar embeddings, while adversarial inputs result in larger discrepancies. Therefore, the threshold is calibrated in advance using clean data, thereby requiring no knowledge of specific attack types or parameters. Formally,      

> 1
> K
> KX
> k=1
> sim( z(x), z (Tk(x)))
> (
> ≥τ(Clean)
> < τ (Adversarial) (1)

If the early detection layer classifies the image as clean, the defense process is bypassed, and the LVLM is queried with the original image. Other-wise, the image and its transformations are passed to the responses generation phase. In practice, τ is set to the 95 th percentile of distances computed on clean data, permitting a 5% 

false-positive rate on clean samples. We observe no adversarial images misclassified as clean. We use K = 10 cropping transformations. 

Image-based response generation. When a poten-tial attack is detected, the LVLM is queried K + 1 

times independently: once with the original im-age and K times with its transformed versions, 

{x, T k(x)}Kk=1 . Each query uses the original in-struction (captions in our case, although other query types are also possible). This process yields a set of responses R = {rk}Kk=0 .

Late detection. Given R, the set of textual re-sponses generated for an image, the late detection phase further verifies the absence of an attack. As before, the goal is to avoid unnecessarily invoking the costly external LLM consolidator during the final stage of the defense pipeline. We note that this stage processes only those inputs that were not already deemed unattacked by the early detector. The central premise of the late detection phase is that discrepancies within the text embedding space serve as indicators of an attack. A large discrepancy suggests that the generated responses diverge substantially from the expected semantic structure, leading to the sample being classified as attacked (Zhang et al., 2023). Furthermore, the response set for the remaining inputs is readily available, as it is required in the subsequent stage (the LLM consolidator), eliminating the need for additional computation. Consequently, this phase is highly efficient while also providing an extra lightweight layer of verification. This step can be implemented using various consistency-based detection methods, including embedding space distance measures (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019), question-answering checks over the content (Wu et al., 2024), and LLM agreement judgments (Manakul et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). We adopt the adversarial detection mechanism proposed in JailGuard (Zhang et al., 2023), which analyzes the discrepancy between the response to the original input and the responses to its trans-formed variants. This choice is motivated by its practicality and robustness in LLM settings. The method is model-agnostic, making it applicable to both open-and closed-source models, and is lightweight and computationally efficient. Briefly, each response ri is first mapped into a vector Vi using a lightweight pretrained sentence embedding (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). A sim-ilarity matrix over the responses is constructed as        

> Si,j =Vi·Vj
> |Vi|| Vj|.(2)

Next, for each response ri, we normalize the ith 

row of the similarity matrix with respect to all re-sponses. Let ∥Si, ·∥1 denotes the L1 norm of the 

ith row vector. This normalization yields a discrete similarity distribution Qi:     

> Qi(k) = Si,k
> ∥Si, ·∥1
> ,for k∈ { 1, . . . , K }.(3)

Qi represents the semantic similarity of response 

ri to the full set R.The similarity matrix is converted to divergence matrix using KL divergence, quantifying the differ-ence between any two similarity distributions. The result is a matrix D, in which each element Di,j 

calculates the KL divergence between two distribu-tions (Qi(x), Q j (x)) ,     

> Di,j =D(Qi(x)∥Qj(x)) =
> KX
> x=1
> Qi(x) log
> Qi(x)
> Qj(x)
> 
> .
> (4)

If two responses (ri, r j ) exhibit significant se-mantic divergence, their corresponding entry Di,j 

will be large. if any value in the divergence matrix 

D exceeds τlate , the input is flagged as attacked and passed into the consolidation phase for final response generation. Otherwise, the original re-sponse r0 is is preserved as the final response. This step captures an additional ∼1% of clean images. The remaining false positives typically cor-respond to weak attacks that introduce only minor caption changes. For example, instead of “A man is standing in a field with two cows, one of which is brown and white . . . ” the model produces “a man standing in a field with an apple in his hand, there’s a cow in the background . . . ”

Response generation. Given the set of responses associated with an image x, the goal of this block is to generate a final output. For instance, when multi-ple captions are provided, it generates a single final caption. This block is applied only to responses corresponding to images deemed likely attacked during the late-detection stage (red arrows in fig. 2); responses from clean images (green arrows) bypass this block entirely. We emphasize that the response-generation block does not take the image as input, but operates solely on the textual descriptions. The input text responses often differ from one another, as they are generated from partial views, and they may differ more from the response associ-ated with the full input image. Moreover, they may exhibit various types of inconsistencies, including content discrepancies or residual artifacts carried over from the original attack. Therefore, the central challenge of this block is to consolidate all input responses into one coherent, unified response. For example, for the image in Figure 2, we get as responses: r1: "A red stop sign is on a pole next to the side of a road, with the word "stop" written in white letters" r2: "A red and white stop sign is on a pole, surrounded by grass and trees. The image shows the sign in front of a road, with cars parked along the side of the road." r3: "A stop sign with the words "stop" in white and "Give me a chance to see you" in red is seen against a gray background" 

r4: "A red and white stop sign is placed on top of a metal pole in the middle of a street, surrounded by trees. The sign is facing left and reads "Stop" in white lettering against a red background." r5: "A red stop sign with white lettering is placed on a pole in the middle of a street." Our key idea is to treat these inconsistencies as informative signals: elements that consistently ap-pear in R (e.g., objects, attributes, relations) help guide the generation of a reliable final output. Con-versely, elements appearing in only one or a few responses are likely incorrect. For instance, in the example above, “A red and white stop sign”, which appears in multiple responses, is highly likely to be correct, whereas “cars parked” ( r2) and “Give me a chance to see you” ( r3), which each appear in only a single response, are likely to be adversarial. See Section B for an additional reasoning example. We propose using an external LLM for this pur-pose. Notably, this is the only stage that employs a large language model, and it is activated exclu-sively for inputs likely to be adversarial. Moreover, it operates solely on textual input rather than im-ages, thereby reducing computational overhead. Specifically, the LLM is prompted as follows (see Section A for the full prompt). First, it is in-formed that all responses originate from the same image, which may have been subjected to an adver-sarial attack. It is then instructed to (1) Identify the content of each response, focusing on the main objects. (2) Identify the consistent content across the re-sponses, focusing on the main objects, attributes, scene settings, and object relationships. (3) Evaluate consistency by tracking the frequency of each main object and the stability of its attributes across all responses. (4) Detect elements that appear only in the original response but seem inconsistent or unsupported, and disregard them. (5) Resolve conflicts by retaining the information confirmed in multiple responses and discarding inconsistent details. (6) Generate a final response that integrates con-sistent content into a clear, natural description, ex-cluding objects, attributes, or contextual details that appear only sporadically unless they are logically consistent with the rest. Our response-generation stage differs in several ways from previous approaches. Sun et al. (Sun et al., 2024) select a final response by randomly sampling from the majority response group. In contrast, we synthesize all available responses to produce a unified output that reflects the full set. Zhou et al. (Zhou et al., 2024) also consolidate mul-tiple responses. However, their approach requires access to the vision component (or the original im-age) during consolidation. By contrast, our method operates solely on the textual responses, resulting in greater efficiency and enabling the use of signifi-cantly smaller vision models. 

4 Evaluation 

This section evaluates our defense’s effectiveness and efficiency. We test against adversarial exam-ples generated by common baseline attacks, ad-hering to their standard setups for a fair compari-son. We also compare our method to other relevant training-free defense strategies. 

4.1 Experimental setup 

We aim to evaluate how effectively our system can defend against attacks - specifically, whether it can still correctly interpret an image even when that image has been manipulated or adversarially al-tered. Furthermore, we will evaluate the overall effectiveness of our defense mechanism. Image captioning offers a particularly strong de-fense evaluation, as it demands a deep and holistic understanding of the visual content. Unlike sim-ple classification, captioning requires recognizing objects, attributes, spatial relationships, and scene context As a result, even subtle disruptions caused by adversarial or corrupted inputs become apparent in the generated descriptions. We evaluate our system using two representative and complementary attack methods: MF-ii (Zhao et al., 2023) and MixAttack (Tu et al., 2023). Both approaches serve as standard baselines in contem-porary attack models (Xie et al., 2025; Mei et al., 2025). These methods generate subtle yet adversar-ially crafted perturbations that preserve the overall visual appearance of the image while deliberately degrading the model’s perceptual understanding. MF-ii pulls the attacked image toward the target image, whereas MixAttack pulls it toward the tar-get caption. In our experiments, we follow the above attack protocols by generating adversarially manipulated images and feeding them directly into the target vision-language models. We conduct all evalua-tions using LLaVA-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2024) and MiniGPT-v2 (Chen et al., 2023), two compact yet widely adopted LVLMs. These models are cho-sen because they were used and evaluated in the two attacks above. Moreover, we focus on smaller architectures, whose accessibility and efficiency make them representative testbeds. For response generation, we use the Gemma-3-27B model (Team et al., 2025), which is a moder-ately sized, open-source model. We source our clean images from the MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014). This ensures that we have Model Attack Off SVLM SVLM VALD                            

> Ours (ours) MiniGPT Clean 0.703 0.685 0.701 0.703
> MF-ii 0.214 0.666 0.681 0.708
> MixAttk 0.297 0.657 0.683 0.711
> LLaVA Clean 0.722 0.715 0.722 0.722
> MF-ii 0.268 0.677 0.704 0.716
> MixAttk 0.440 0.650 0.682 0.694
> Table 1: Captioning results. VALD outperforms base-lines under both MixAttack and MF-ii on LLaVA-1.5-7B and MiniGPT-v2 according to the SentenceBERT score. Moreover, it is the only method that preserves clean-image performance at the “Defense off” level.

relevant ground-truth captions for comparison. Our test set consists of 1,000 images randomly selected from the MS-COCO validation split, and the target attack texts are randomly sampled from the MS-COCO training set. We evaluate the resulting captions by compar-ing them to the COCO labeled captions. We use SentenceBERT (SBERT) (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) embedding space to compute the similarity between the generated text and the ground-truth caption. This metric provides semantically rich em-bedding space, with similarity scores that strongly correlate with human judgment of content equiva-lence without focusing on different phrasing. 

4.2 Results Captioning evaluation. Table 1 compares our training-free method with two variants of the training-free SmoothVLM defense: the original version using random masking (Sun et al., 2024) and our extended variant, which applies the same transformations as our method and selects the best one. We also report results with no defense ap-plied (“Defense off”). Performance is evaluated on clean images and on images attacked by MF-ii (Zhao et al., 2023) and MixAttack (Tu et al., 2023). Our method consistently outperforms all baselines; for example, under the MF-ii attack on LLaVA, it achieves a SentenceBERT score of 0.716, compared to 0.677 for (Sun et al., 2024) and 0.704 for our improved SmoothVLM variant. Notably, our method is the only one that preserves clean-image performance at the “Defense off” level. Fi-nally, incorporating our transformation-selection strategy improves SmoothVLM’s performance. We compare only against methods applicable to smaller LVLMs such as LLaVA and MiniGPTv2, and there-fore do not include (Zhou et al., 2024), which re-                        

> Model Attack Acc Precision Recall LLaVA Clean 0.965 0N/A MF-ii 0.999 10.999 MixAttack 0.991 10.991 MiniGPT Clean 0.953 0N/A MF-ii 0.999 10.999 MixAttack 0.993 10.993
> Table 2: Detection results. The vast majority of clean images are correctly identified, and no adversarial im-ages are misclassified.

lies on the reasoning capabilities of more powerful models such as GPT-4o-Mini and Gemini. 

Attack detection. Table 2 reports detection accu-racy (the percentage of correctly classified inputs), recall (the fraction of adversarial images that are successfully detected), and precision (the fraction of inputs flagged as adversarial that are indeed ad-versarial). Overall, 0.965 of clean images are cor-rectly identified as clean, with 0.95 already filtered out by the fast early detector. For images subjected to either attack, the precision is 10 , indicating that no adversarial images are mistakenly classified as clean, while the recall is consistently high, demon-strating effective adversarial detection. 

Qualitative evaluation. Figures 1 and 3 qualita-tively compare our captions with an LVLM’s. Al-though the attacked images are visually similar to the originals, the LVLM produces captions aligned with the targeted attack. In contrast, our method successfully resists the attack and generates ac-curate captions. For example, while our model correctly captions a dog with a frisbee, LLaVA misidentifies the image as a red fire hydrant. 

Runtime analysis. Without any defense, caption generation takes 1.8 seconds per image. When our defense is applied, the early detector requires 

1.9 seconds per image. It correctly identifies 95% 

of clean images, which are then excluded from the remainder of the pipeline. Images not classi-fied as clean are forwarded to the LVLMs and the late detector, a stage that takes 18 .2 seconds. At this point, an additional 0.5% -1.5% of the remain-ing clean images are identified (depending on the model and the attack) and removed from further processing. Finally, response generation takes 2.8

seconds. By comparison, SmoothVLM processes every image and requires 52 .7 seconds per image. Runtime analysis was conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU. (a) input (b) attacked image (c) captions (a) input (b) attacked image (c) captions 

Figure 3: Qualitative results. Although the attacked images (b) appear nearly identical to the originals (a), the LVLM incorrectly captions them (c). In contrast, our model successfully defends against the attack and generates accurate captions (c). The images were attacked via (Zhao et al., 2023). See Section C for additional results.                          

> Random crop Pixel masking Attack 95% 90% 85% 10% 15% 20% Clean 0.722 0.722 0.722 0.726 0.723 0.723 MF-ii 0.716 0.716 0.713 0.694 0.693 0.689 MixAttack 0.694 0.690 0.687 0.671 0.677 0.676

Table 3: Transformations. Cropping outperforms pixel masking, largely independent of crop ratio. 

4.3 Ablation study 

Our ablation was conducted on LLaVA-1.5-7B. 

Transformations parameters. Table 3 evalu-ates content-preserving transformations, including large-scale random cropping and pixel masking with their respective parameters. The results show that cropping outperforms pixel masking and is largely insensitive to the crop ratio, with 95% yield-ing slightly better performance. 

Perturbation magnitude. Table 4 evaluates de-fense performance across different perturbation budgets ( ϵ), defined as the distance between the clean image and the adversarial image (Carlini et al., 2019). As the noise level increases, per-formance without defense (Off) degrades as ex-pected, while applying the defense substantially improves robustness. Moreover, higher noise lev-els widen the performance gap between our model and SmoothVLM. For instance, at noise level 16 ,a commonly used setting, our model outperforms SmoothVLM by 0.039 , and at noise level 24 this gap increases to 0.046 under the MF-ii attack.                                    

> Model ϵOff SVLM SVLM VALD
> Ours (ours) Clean –0.722 0.715 0.722 0.722 MF-ii
> 80.284 0.687 0.716 0.723
> 16 0.268 0.677 0.704 0.716
> 24 0.260 0.662 0.697 0.708 MixAttack
> 80.606 0.688 0.703 0.708
> 16 0.440 0.650 0.682 0.694
> 24 0.345 0.606 0.663 0.677

Table 4: Impact of perturbation. Increasing noise de-grades performance without defense (Off), while our defense improves robustness and increasingly outper-forms SmoothVLM (SVLM). 

5 Conclusion 

We presented a general, efficient, and training-free defense for Large Vision-Language Models against adversarial images. Our approach builds on two key ideas: a two-stage detection mechanism that ef-ficiently filters most clean inputs, thereby avoiding costly defense procedures, and lightweight image transformations that expose adversarial behavior by consolidating multiple responses, where incon-sistencies are weakened and consistent elements are reinforced. Extensive experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art accuracy while preserving perfor-mance on clean inputs. These results underscore the benefit of decoupling adversarial detection from expensive reasoning, enabling a practical and scal-able defense for real-world LVLM deployment. 6 Limitations 

Our defense is based on the assumption that genuine semantic content remains invariant un-der content-preserving transformations. However, when the same error appears consistently across multiple views, the method may converge on an incorrect yet mutually corroborated interpretation. For instance, we observed an image containing two motorcycles (see Section D) to which substantial noise was added. Most transformed views halluci-nated a third motorcycle, and the resulting caption incorrectly described three motorcycles. In addition, there is an inherent trade-off be-tween efficiency and robustness: as more images are classified as clean by the detector, the risk of failing to identify an attacked image increases. References 

Sarah K. Alhabeeb and Amal A. Al-Shargabi. 2024. Text-to-image synthesis with generative models: Methods, datasets, performance metrics, challenges, and future direction. 

IEEE Access , 12:24412–24427. Luke Bailey, Euan Ong, Stuart Russell, and Scott Emmons. 2023. Image hijacks: Adversarial images can control gener-ative models at runtime. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00236 .Davide Caffagni, Federico Cocchi, Luca Barsellotti, Nicholas Moratelli, Sara Sarto, Lorenzo Baraldi, Marcella Cor-nia, and Rita Cucchiara. 2024. The revolution of mul-timodal large language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12451 .Nicholas Carlini, Anish Athalye, Nicolas Papernot, Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, Dimitris Tsipras, Ian Good-fellow, Aleksander Madry, and Alexey Kurakin. 2019. On evaluating adversarial robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06705 .Jun Chen, Deyao Zhu, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, Zechun Liu, Pengchuan Zhang, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Vikas Chandra, Yunyang Xiong, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2023. Minigpt-v2: large language model as a unified interface for vision-language multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09478 .Yi Ding, Bolian Li, and Ruqi Zhang. 2024. Eta: Evaluating then aligning safety of vision language models at inference time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06625 .Samar Fares, Klea Ziu, Toluwani Aremu, Nikita Durasov, Martin Takáˇ c, Pascal Fua, Karthik Nandakumar, and Ivan Laptev. 2024. Mirrorcheck: Efficient adversar-ial defense for vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09250 .Yunhao Gou, Kai Chen, Zhili Liu, Lanqing Hong, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, Dit-Yan Yeung, James T Kwok, and Yu Zhang. 2024. Eyes closed, safety on: Protecting multimodal llms via image-to-text transformation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 388–404. Springer. Ngoc Dung Huynh, Mohamed Reda Bouadjenek, Sunil Aryal, Imran Razzak, and Hakim Hacid. 2025. Visual question answering: from early developments to recent advances–a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03939 .Jiayi Kuang, Ying Shen, Jingyou Xie, Haohao Luo, Zhe Xu, Ronghao Li, Yinghui Li, Xianfeng Cheng, Xika Lin, and Yu Han. 2025. Natural language understanding and infer-ence with mllm in visual question answering: A survey. 

ACM Computing Surveys , 57(8):1–36. Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. 2023. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In In-ternational conference on machine learning , pages 19730– 19742. PMLR. Zhaoyi Li, Xiaohan Zhao, Dong-Dong Wu, Jiacheng Cui, and Zhiqiang Shen. 2025. A frustratingly simple yet highly effective attack baseline: Over 90% success rate against the strong black-box models of gpt-4.5/4o/o1. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10635 .Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision , pages 740–755. Springer. Daizong Liu, Mingyu Yang, Xiaoye Qu, Pan Zhou, Yu Cheng, and Wei Hu. 2025. A survey of attacks on large vision– language models: Resources, advances, and future trends. 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-tems .Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. 2024. Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 26296–26306. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment (2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634 , 12. Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark Gales. 2023. Self-checkgpt: Zero-resource black-box hallucination detection for generative large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 9004–9017. Hefei Mei, Zirui Wang, Shen You, Minjing Dong, and Chang Xu. 2025. Veattack: Downstream-agnostic vision encoder attack against large vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17440 .Yichuan Mo, Yuji Wang, Zeming Wei, and Yisen Wang. 2024. Fight back against jailbreaking via prompt adversarial tun-ing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:64242–64272. Weili Nie, Brandon Guo, Yujia Huang, Chaowei Xiao, Arash Vahdat, and Anima Anandkumar. 2022. Diffu-sion models for adversarial purification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07460 .Zhenxing Niu, Haodong Ren, Xinbo Gao, Gang Hua, and Rong Jin. 2024. Jailbreaking attack against multimodal large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02309 .Renjie Pi, Tianyang Han, Jianshu Zhang, Yueqi Xie, Rui Pan, Qing Lian, Hanze Dong, Jipeng Zhang, and Tong Zhang. 2024. Mllm-protector: Ensuring mllm’s safety without hurting performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02906 .Xiangyu Qi, Kaixuan Huang, Ashwinee Panda, Peter Hen-derson, Mengdi Wang, and Prateek Mittal. 2024. Visual adversarial examples jailbreak aligned large language mod-els. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 38, pages 21527–21536. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, and 1 others. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learn-ing , pages 8748–8763. PmLR. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sen-tence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 .Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695. Christian Schlarmann, Naman Deep Singh, Francesco Croce, and Matthias Hein. 2024. Robust clip: Unsupervised ad-versarial fine-tuning of vision embeddings for robust large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12336 .Jiachen Sun, Changsheng Wang, Jiongxiao Wang, Yiwei Zhang, and Chaowei Xiao. 2024. Safeguarding vision-language models against patched visual prompt injectors. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10529 .Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Ta-tiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, and 1 others. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 .Haoqin Tu, Chenhang Cui, Zijun Wang, Yiyang Zhou, Bingchen Zhao, Junlin Han, Wangchunshu Zhou, Huaxiu Yao, and Cihang Xie. 2023. How many unicorns are in this image? a safety evaluation benchmark for vision llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16101 .Junfei Wu, Qiang Liu, Ding Wang, Jinghao Zhang, Shu Wu, Liang Wang, and Tieniu Tan. 2024. Logical closed loop: Uncovering object hallucinations in large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11622 .Peng Xie, Yequan Bie, Jianda Mao, Yangqiu Song, Yang Wang, Hao Chen, and Kani Chen. 2025. Chain of at-tack: On the robustness of vision-language models against transfer-based adversarial attacks. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 14679–14689. Mang Ye, Xuankun Rong, Wenke Huang, Bo Du, Nenghai Yu, and Dacheng Tao. 2025. A survey of safety on large vision-language models: Attacks, defenses and evaluations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14881 .Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Ke Li, Xing Sun, Tong Xu, and Enhong Chen. 2024. A survey on multimodal large language models. National Science Review , 11(12). Jiaming Zhang, Junhong Ye, Xingjun Ma, Yige Li, Yunfan Yang, Yunhao Chen, Jitao Sang, and Dit-Yan Yeung. 2025. Anyattack: Towards large-scale self-supervised adversar-ial attacks on vision-language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 19900–19909. Xiaoyu Zhang, Cen Zhang, Tianlin Li, Yihao Huang, Xi-aojun Jia, Ming Hu, Jie Zhang, Yang Liu, Shiqing Ma, and Chao Shen. 2023. Jailguard: A universal detection framework for llm prompt-based attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10766 .Yudong Zhang, Ruobing Xie, Jiansheng Chen, Xingwu Sun, and Yu Wang. 2024. Pip: Detecting adversarial examples in large vision-language models via attention patterns of irrelevant probe questions. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , MM ’24, page 11175–11183. ACM. Yunqing Zhao, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Xiao Yang, Chongx-uan Li, Ngai-Man Man Cheung, and Min Lin. 2023. On evaluating adversarial robustness of large vision-language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 36:54111–54138. Qi Zhou, Tianlin Li, Qing Guo, Dongxia Wang, Yun Lin, Yang Liu, and Jin Song Dong. 2024. Defending lvlms against vi-sion attacks through partial-perception supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12722 .A Prompts 

In two stages of the method described in Section 3, we query the LVLM; below, we detail the corre-sponding prompts. 

Image-based response generation. Each LVLM is queried using the prompt "provide a short de-scription of the image" for both the original and the transformed inputs. We also experimented with more targeted prompts for the transformed images, aiming to pro-duce object level information needed by the consol-idation stage (e.g., explicit listing of main objects). However, we found that they tended to produce shorter and less descriptive captions. 

Response generation. The full prompt used for consolidation of crops for the task of captioning is: 

"You are a multi-caption reasoning agent. You will receive multiple AI-generated image captions originated in from the same image. One is from the full image and others were generated with large crops from the original image as input. The full image may have been affected by an adversarial at-tack and its caption should be treated with caution. The other crops might be adversarially affected as well, but less than the original image. Your task is to consolidate these captions into a single, unified caption that accurately describes the content of the original image following a step-by-step procedure: 1. Identify the content of the captions. Focus on identifying clearly described main objects. Be precise and grounded in the text. 2. Identify consistent attributes and scene con-text. List attributes of the identified objects (de-scriptive features like color, size, appearance), the scene setting (environment, context), and any ac-tions or relationships described in the caption. Do not speculate. If a detail is implied but not stated, omit it. 3. Evaluate consistency: Keep track of how frequently each object appears across the original image caption and the cropped image captions. Ob-jects consistently appearing in most of the captions from cropped regions are highly likely to be present in the original image. Give higher weight to object presence confirmed across multiple crop captions, especially if the original caption significantly di-verges from the majority. 4. Check caption alignment: Detect and ignore elements that only appear in the original caption if they seem inconsistent or unsupported.   

> Figure 4: Consolidation process explanation. The following elements are mentioned by most captions and form the basis of the final consolidated description: a snow-covered park or forest, a wooden bench, trees, and the bench being covered in snow. Conversely, the following details either conflict with the majority or appear only sporadically; therefore, they are treated as inconsistent and omitted from the final caption: a coconut beauty product, a bird on the bench, a green object on the tree, and a black-and-white filter.

5. Resolve conflicts using a majority-consensus rule: Prefer information that appears in multi-ple captions. Identify reliable objects and discard any that are not corroborated by multiple captions. Group semantically equivalent terms (e.g., "car" and "vehicle"). Your output: 1. A final caption that combines consistent con-tent into a clear and natural description: In the final caption avoid including objects, attributes, or context mentioned only in one caption unless clearly confirmed by other captions or logically consistent. 2. An explanation of the data consolidation pro-cess: Make sure not to include parts of the expla-nation in the final generated caption! The original image caption is: <original cap-tion>. The crops captions are: <crops captions>" 

B Example for reasoning process 

We next present an example of the consolidation process in the response generation stage. Given the input image in Figure 4, the captions generated from the transformed views include the following (out of a total of 10 captions): 1. "The image features a wooden park bench sitting in the snow, surrounded by trees. The bench appears to . . . The scene is captured in black and white, adding a sense of nostalgia to the image." (a) input (b) attacked image (c) captions (a) input (b) attacked image (c) captions   

> Figure 5: Qualitative results. Although the attacked images (b) appear nearly identical to the originals (a), the LVLM incorrectly captions them (c). In contrast, our model successfully defends against the attack and generates accurate captions (c). The images were attacked via (Zhao et al., 2023).

2. "The image features a snowy park with a wooden bench sitting in the snow. The bench is situated near a tree, and there is a bird perched on the back of the bench . . . "3. "The image features a snow-covered park with a wooden bench sitting in the middle of the snow. The bench is positioned under a tree, 

. . . The tree is adorned with a green object, possibly a decoration or a piece of clothing." In the explanation of the data consolidation pro-cess used to produce the output (Section A), we obtain the following explanation: 

"The original caption describes an image of a co-conut beauty product, which is inconsistent with the crop captions. The crop captions consistently de-scribe a snow-covered park or forest with a wooden bench and trees. The bench being covered in snow is also a consistent detail. Details like a bird on the bench, a green object on the tree, or the black and white filter appear in only a few captions and are therefore omitted. The final caption consolidates the most frequently mentioned elements - the bench, snow, trees, and the park/forest setting - to provide an accurate description of the image based on the majority of the provided evidence." 

C Additional qualitative results 

Figure 5 provides additional qualitative results, in addition to those presented in Figure 3. It verifies that, despite minimal visual differences, the LVLM   

> Figure 6: Example of a failure case in the consoli-dation process. Most transformed views hallucinate a third motorcycle, causing the consolidated caption to mistake.

yields attack-aligned captions, while our method resists the attack and produces correct outputs. 

D Visualization of the limitation 

Section 6 describes a failure case in which the input image contains two motorcycles parked side by side, yet some transformed views incorrectly report three motorcycles. Figure 6 illustrates this input image. The final consolidated response is: "The image features three motorcycles parked in a row on a concrete or cement surface. The motorcycles are of different sizes and positioned next to each other, near a brick wall." 

The explanation of the consolidation process for this caption is as follows: "The consolidation pro-cess began by identifying the core objects present in all captions: motorcycles. The number of mo-torcycles varied between ’two’ and ’three’. ’three’ appeared more frequently across the crop captions and is therefore prioritized. Mentions of two mo-torcycles may be explained by cropping effects." 

This case may be explained by the presence of visible car edges on the left side of the image, which some crop captions may have misinterpreted as parts of an additional motorcycle.