Title: Learning to Generate Secure Code via Token-Level Rewards

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.23407v1

Published Time: Mon, 02 Mar 2026 01:03:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Generate Secure Code via Token-Level Rewards 

Jiazheng Quan 1,2 , Xiaodong Li 2, Bin Wang 3, Guo An 4, Like Liu 3,

Degen Huang 1, Liu Lin 4,† , and Chengbin Hou 1,† 1Fuyao University of Science and Technology, 2Xiamen University 

> 3

Peking University, 4Huawei 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have demon-strated strong capabilities in code generation, yet they remain prone to producing security vulnerabilities. Existing approaches commonly suffer from two key limitations: the scarcity of high-quality security data and coarse-grained reinforcement learning reward signals. To ad-dress these challenges, we propose Vul2Safe, a new secure code generation framework that leverages LLM self-reflection to construct high-confidence repair pairs from real-world vulner-abilities, and further generates diverse implicit prompts to build the PrimeVul+ dataset. Mean-while, we introduce SRCode, a novel training framework that pioneers the use of token-level rewards in reinforcement learning for code se-curity, which enables the model to continuously attend to and reinforce critical fine-grained se-curity patterns during training. Compared with traditional instance-level reward schemes, our approach allows for more precise optimization of local security implementations. Extensive experiments show that PrimeVul+ and SRCode substantially reduce security vulnerabilities in generated code while improving overall code quality across multiple benchmarks. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) has accelerated the adop-tion of AI-assisted coding tools in industrial set-tings. These tools are capable of automating soft-ware development workflows with expert-level pro-ficiency and generating complex code from natural language prompts, substantially reducing the bar-rier to software development (Hou et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024). However, a growing body of empirical studies and reports reveals a concerning trend: the model-generated code is increasingly be-ing deployed directly into production environments (Wang et al., 2025; Tabarsi et al., 2025; Park, 2025). Despite their strong ability to produce functionally correct implementations, current LLMs remain far from meeting the security requirements necessary for production deployment. Prior work has shown that a substantial fraction of generated code still contains latent security vulnerabilities under real-istic evaluations (Xu et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2025). As a result, enhancing the secure code gen-eration capabilities of LLMs has become one of the most urgent challenges in this domain. However, the previous work continues to exhibit several limitations when deployed in practical set-tings (Liu et al., 2025; Hasan et al., 2025; He et al., 2024; Hajipour et al., 2024b). (i) Existing training data often lacks realism. Many approaches con-struct datasets using template-based instructions that deviate substantially from the natural contexts in which developers interact with LLMs, making it difficult for fine-tuned models to maintain ro-bust security behavior. (ii) Current training task designs are limited in both hierarchy and diversity. Most datasets consist of isolated, homogeneous tasks without a structured progression of difficulty, which constrains models from developing a prin-cipled understanding of security concepts and sus-tained safety awareness during code generation. Beyond the data and task designs, limitations also emerge in how security-related training sig-nals are conveyed during reinforcement learning. (iii) Reinforcement learning reward signals remain insufficiently specified. Although reinforcement learning is widely regarded as a promising mecha-nism for improving model security, most existing methods rely on coarse, instance-level rewards that provide weak supervision for LLMs. In practice, many security vulnerabilities stem from localized and subtle code patterns, especially in system-level languages such as C/C++. Such coarse reward signals are insufficient for capturing fine-grained safety behaviors, which lead to security degrada-tion when models are deployed in more natural, open-ended, and non-template-based settings. 1

> arXiv:2602.23407v1 [cs.CR] 26 Feb 2026

To enable models to learn fine-grained secure code implementations while reducing the semantic gap between training and real-world deployment, we propose SRCode, a two-stage training frame-work for secure code generation. Rather than sim-ply aggregating capabilities across isolated tasks, SRCode aims to progressively cultivate security awareness in the training environments that closely resemble real-world usage. We posit that secure coding ability emerges not from a single task, but through a continuous and semantically coherent training process. To this end, we organize diverse training contexts using multi-ple implicitly guided prompts and structure three tasks, i.e., vulnerability identification, vulnerabil-ity remediation, and secure code generation, into a curriculum with increasing difficulty, resulting in the PrimeVul+ dataset. During the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage, the model gradually builds a systematic security knowledge structure through hierarchical and progressively challenging tasks, in-stead of passively memorizing static secure coding templates from isolated examples. Building upon this SFT foundation, the rein-forcement learning stage of SRCode further em-phasizes the fine-grained structure of secure code. We introduce token-level rewards (TLR) into re-inforcement learning for code security, using fine-grained reward signals to explicitly reinforce defen-sive coding patterns. This design encourages the model to continuously attend to security-relevant tokens during generation, rather than relying on am-biguous guidance from templated instructions or instance-level rewards. Such a fine-grained and curriculum-driven training process not only im-proves the model’s ability to mitigate localized vulnerabilities, but also enhances its structured un-derstanding of secure implementation strategies, enabling more robust secure code generation in complex and non-template real-world scenarios. The contributions are summarized as follows: 

(1) Realistic, real-world-usage supervision. 

We develop the Vul2Safe code generation frame-work and the PrimeVul+ dataset, which introduce real developer interaction patterns across diverse contexts into training through implicitly guided prompt design and a curriculum of progressively challenging, hierarchical tasks. This design pro-vides supervision for secure code generation that more closely reflects real-world usage scenarios. 

(2) Fine-grained token-level reinforcement. 

We introduce token-level rewards (TLR) for secure code generation, enabling reinforcement learning to operate at a fine-grained, token-level resolution for the first time. This design explicitly captures local distinctions between secure and vulnerable patterns, allowing the model to focus on critical de-tails during generation and significantly enhancing the effectiveness of reinforcement learning. 

(3) Comprehensive empirical evaluation. We conduct systematic evaluations of SRCode across models with diverse sizes and architectures. Ex-perimental results show consistent and significant improvements across all security-related metrics, as well as stable performance gains under different evaluation settings, highlighting both the effective-ness and robustness of our approach. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Secure Code Generation 

With the rapid adoption of code-generation LLMs in software development practices (Allal et al., 2023; Roziere et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2021; Hui et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024), researchers have increasingly recog-nized their systematic deficiencies in code security. Although existing approaches enable models to generate functionally correct code across diverse tasks (Dou et al., 2024; Shojaee et al., 2023; Le et al., 2022), the generated code often exhibits se-curity flaws in real-world settings, such as missing input validation and improper handling of bound-ary conditions. These issues largely originate from structural limitations in the training process. First, many security-oriented datasets deviate from realistic development contexts, as their in-struction designs are typically highly templated and fail to reflect natural developer–model interac-tions (He and Vechev, 2023; He et al., 2024; Hasan et al., 2025). Second, existing training paradigms usually focus on isolated objectives, lacking se-mantic continuity and hierarchical task progres-sion. Such fragmented supervision makes it diffi-cult for models to form a coherent and systematic understanding of code security, thereby constrain-ing their reasoning capabilities in complex scenar-ios (Wang et al., 2023; Hasan et al., 2025). To mitigate these limitations, several studies have ex-plored security-oriented prompt engineering and preference learning to encourage models to attend to potential vulnerabilities (Hasan et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025; Hajipour et al., 2024b). Nevertheless, these methods struggle to provide sustained and 2effective guidance in long-sequence generation or scenarios involving complex control flow. Moreover, recent analyses (Dai et al., 2025) indi-cate that training paradigms based on instance-level supervision or sequence-level rewards generally lack fine-grained signals, preventing models from identifying vulnerabilities that are localized to a small number of critical statements. 

2.2 Reinforcement Learning for LLMs 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a key technique in improving LLMs’ behavioral con-sistency and instruction-following. With the de-velopment of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), various reward- and preference-optimization methods have emerged (Liu et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024b), in-cluding policy optimization frameworks based on PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). They allow models to receive continuous feedback during generation, providing a foundation for addressing complex se-quential decision problems such as code security. However, most safety-oriented code generation approaches still rely on instance- or sequence-level rewards (Yao et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025), where reward sparsity in long sequences reduces RL’s effectiveness in learning safety semantics. To miti-gate this, some studies have explored finer-grained reward mechanisms (Li et al., 2025; Hasan et al., 2025; Fan et al., 2025; Ouyang et al., 2025), but these either depend on overly complex structured analysis or fail to capture token-level information that leads to vulnerabilities. Distinguished from the prior work, we intro-duce token-level rewards (TLR) into reinforcement learning for code security, enabling fine-grained, security-oriented tuning that directly reinforces token-level safety patterns. 

3 Methodology 

Despite the recent advances in LLM-based code generation, secure code generation remains a signif-icant challenge. To tackle these issues, we propose a systematic solution, as illustrated in Figure 1. 

3.1 Vul2Safe: Implicitly Prompted Secure Code Generation 

To systematically construct high-quality security data for training, we propose the Vul2Safe frame-work, which converts real vulnerability samples into highly reliable security patch corpora and eval-uation tasks. Specifically, we adopt DeepSeek-R1 as the base model and leverage its self-reflection mechanism to perform multi-round generative re-pairs on vulnerable code. Repair quality is ensured through CodeQL (GitHub, 2024) static analysis and manual sampling audits, producing semanti-cally consistent < code vul , code repair > pairs. To better reflect how developers interact with LLMs in natural contexts, Vul2Safe generates di-verse prompts for each sample. These prompts are implicitly guided by DeepSeek-R1 to cover differ-ent task contexts and usage scenarios. We incor-porate two strategies in the implicit prompting: (i) vulnerability-inducing prompts based on functional requirements, which embed unsafe implementa-tion patterns in instructions to guide the model toward vulnerability-related contexts; (ii) code-completion prompts based on benign code prefixes, which present potentially risky snippets to elicit the model’s understanding of vulnerability patterns during subsequent code generation. Further details can be found in Appendix H. Ultimately, Vul2Safe produces < Prompt , code vul , code repair > triplets, automatically transforming vulnerable code into structurally standardized, task-reproducible secure repair corpora, effectively addressing the scarcity of high-quality security data. 

3.2 PrimeVul+: Curriculum-Based Safe Code Generation Dataset 

To support training and evaluation of LLMs in real-world code security scenarios, we construct the PrimeVul+ dataset from high-quality open-source code. Following OWASP’s latest LLM secu-rity report (OWASP Foundation, 2025), we select 3,289 code samples from PrimeVul (Ding et al., 2024) covering 14 common weakness enumeration (CWE) vulnerability categories. Each sample is systematically processed using the Vul2Safe frame-work. After that, we evaluate and organize the tasks according to vulnerability complexity and remedia-tion difficulty, resulting in PrimeVul+, a structured and quality-controlled dataset closely aligned with real-world LLM usage. The dataset includes three progressively challenging task categories: vulner-able code detection, vulnerable code repair, and secure code generation, totaling 2,500 tasks. Concretely, the first two categories are used for SFT to improve the model’s basic capabilities in identifying and fixing vulnerabilities. The third category, i.e., secure code generation, is designed for RL, training the model to generate robust, best-practice-compliant security implementations under 3Teacher Model 

PrimeVul+ 

Vul2Safe 

> Real-world Information Sources
> Vul_Metadata
> Vulnerability Dataset Sanitized Code CWE-ID Vul_label

## ...... 

> LLM Judge
> LLM Generate
> Secure
> Insecure
> CodeQL & Manual Review Generate Implicit Prompt
> Vul2Safe Triplet
> Vul2Safe Triplet
> Task 3: Secure Code Generation

SRCode     

> Stage 1: SFT with Task 1 & 2 Stage 2: RL with Task 3
> Task 1: Vulnerable Code Detection
> Task 2: Vulnerable Code Repair
> Task 1: Vulnerable Code Detection
> Task 2: Vulnerable Code Repair no_vulnerability vulnerability
> Answer : Answer :
> ......<Original Code>......
> <Repaired Code (CWE-XX)>
> ......<Original Code>......
> Answer :
> Secure Code
> Answer :
> Insecure Code
> Reward Model
> Task 3: Secure Code Generation
> Task Classification Token Length Difficulty Vul_Severity Code Complexity
> ii) Benign code compeletion i) Implicitly vulnerable prompts

Figure 1: Our Methodology. (1) Vul2Safe transforms real-world vulnerable code into high-quality secure repair data with diverse implicit prompts. (2) PrimeVul+ ranks the samples based on four metrics and classifies them into three progressively difficult, curriculum-style tasks. (3) SRCode first applies SFT on detection and repair tasks, and then performs RL on secure code generation with token-level rewards (TLR) for fine-grained safety optimization. 

complex security contexts. PrimeVul+ thus pro-vides a high-quality, scalable, and realistic foun-dation for training, evaluating, and benchmarking code security models. 

3.3 TLR: Token-level Rewards for Safe Code Generation 

In reinforcement learning (RL) driven secure code generation, traditional reward signals are typically evaluated at the code fragment level, which makes it difficult for policy models to accurately learn local secure implementations. To address this, we introduce a token-level rewards (TLR) mech-anism that assigns fine-grained rewards to each token generated by the model. Specifically, for each training sample, the policy model receives an input prompt qi and generates a code sequence 

Si = ( t0,t1, ..., tLi−1) of length Li, token by token. After generating the sequence, the teacher model identifies secure implementations within the code and extracts all corresponding tokens into the se-cure token set T. Token-level positive rewards 

r+

token (qi,t j), for j ∈ [0, Li − 1], are then computed based on T, as defined in Equation (1). 

r+

token (qi,t j) = 

(

0, t j /∈ T

α, t j ∈ T (1) where α > 0 represents the fixed reward for se-curity tokens. The teacher model then analyzes whether the code contains CWE vulnerabilities. If they exist, Vul (Si) = True is set; a negative reward 

rglobal is assigned based on the number and severity of vulnerabilities. This yields the negative reward 

r−

token (qi,t j), as depicted in Equation (2). 

r−

token (qi,t j) = 

(

0, ¬Vul (Si)

rglobal 

Li , Vul (Si) (2) By combining the above process, the instanta-neous reward r(qi,t j) is obtained for each token, as shown in Equation (3) , where rorig (qi,t j) represents the reward generated by reward model. 

r(qi,t j) = rorig (qi,t j) + r−

token (qi,t j)+ r+

token (qi,t j) (3) Regarding RL policy optimization, the gradient follows the standard REINFORCE form (Williams, 1992), as described in Equation (4) below: 

∇θ J(θ ) = E

"

# ∑

j

∇θ log πθ (t j | t< j)A j

#

(4) The advantages and further details (e.g., pseudo-code) of TLR are elaborated in Appendix A. 

3.4 SRCode: A Two-Stage Training Framework Using the TLR 

In this work, we propose SRCode, a two-stage training framework incorporating the TLR mecha-nism. During the SFT stage, we fine-tune baseline 4models on the vulnerable code detection and vulner-able code repair tasks using the PrimeVul+ dataset, thereby enhancing their fundamental capabilities to detect and repair vulnerabilities. During the RL stage, the policy model generates each token in the code sequence to obtain immediate rewards as defined by Equation (3). Upon receiving immediate rewards, the general-ized advantage estimation (GAE) is employed to construct a token-level advantage function. To this end, we define the state during generation process as a prefix representation si, j = ( qi,t< j) and denote the value network as Vφ (·). The immediate reward for generating token t j under state si, j is denoted as ri, j = r(qi,t j). Based on above definitions, the one-step temporal difference residual becomes as: 

δi, j = ri, j + γV (si, j+1) −V (si, j) (5) where γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor. After that, we employ GAE to perform weighted accumulation of residuals from future time steps, thus obtaining the advantage estimate Asecure (qi,t j) for token t j:

Asecure (qi,t j) =  

> Li−j−1

# ∑

> l=0

(γλ )l δi, j+l (6) where λ ∈ [0, 1] controls the balance between bias and variance. At sequence termination states si,Li ,we set Vφ (si,Li ) = 0 to ensure the advantage es-timate converges naturally at the end. This def-inition provides a stable and variance-controlled estimation method for the advantage term in the subsequent PPO objective function, fully compat-ible with our introduced token-level fine-grained reward signal mechanism. Based on this, we use the aforementioned ad-vantage function Asecure (qi,t j) as the core input to the PPO clip objective, with the basic form of the objective function given by Equation (7).  

> Jsecure PPO =
> M

## ∑

> i=1
> Li−1

## ∑                 

> j=0
> min  ρi,j×Asecure (qi,tj),
> clip  ρi,j,1−ε,1+ε×Asecure (qi,tj)(7)

where ρi, j represents the probability ratio between the current policy and the old policy at token t j,which corresponds to the importance sampling co-efficient in the PPO framework. To prevent exces-sive updates, we apply clipping to this coefficient. The specific formula for the importance sampling coefficient is as follows: 

ρi, j = Pθ (t j | si, j)

Pθ ′ (t j | si, j) , si, j = ( qi,t< j) (8) In the actual optimization process, the PPO loss function takes the negative value of the aforemen-tioned objective function. The gradient formula (9) demonstrates that the log probability of each to-ken is multiplied by the pruned advantage function, thereby reinforcing safe tokens and suppressing vulnerability patterns during updates.     

> ∇θLsecure PPO =−
> M

## ∑

> i=1
> Li−1

## ∑                      

> j=0
> 
> min
> 
> ρi,j×Asecure (qi,tj),
> clip (ρi,j,1−ε,1+ε)×Asecure (qi,tj)
> 
> ×∇θlog Pθ(tj|si,j)
> 
> (9)

4 Experiments 

To evaluate the effectiveness of SRCode in enhanc-ing code generation security and study its underly-ing mechanisms, we group experiments and pose the following four research questions (RQs). 

RQ1: Effectiveness Improvement Analysis. 

Compared to baseline methods, do our PrimeVul+ dataset and SRCode approach substantially en-hance the safety of code generated by LLMs? 

RQ2: Reliability of Safety Improvements. 

Can SRCode consistently deliver stable perfor-mance across models of varying scales and archi-tectures, while uniformly reducing the number of vulnerabilities in the generated code? 

RQ3: Module Contribution Analysis. What contribution does each module of SRCode make? Which designs are most critical to improve safety? 

RQ4: Generalization Analysis and Sampling Efficiency. How does SRCode affect general code generation performance and sampling efficiency? 

4.1 Experienmental Setup Base Models and Benchmarks. Three open-source large language series models: CodeLlama (Roziere et al., 2023), Qwen-Coder (Hui et al., 2024), and DeepSeek-Coder (Guo et al., 2024) are adopted for experiments. During evaluation, we mainly focus on the effectiveness of LLMs in enhancing code safety within C/C++ scenarios. Specifically, we employ three high-quality security evaluation benchmarks, i.e., CWEval (Peng et al., 2025), CodeLMSec (Hajipour et al., 2024a), and CyberSecEval (Wan et al., 2024), to ensure our results accurately and comprehensively reflect the models’ security capabilities. Besides, to further gauge the model’s general code generation capabil-ities, we employ the HumanEval Pro and MBPP 5Method Size CWEval CodeLMSec CyberSecEval                                                                                

> FS@1(C/C++) FS@1(Python) Sec.Rate Pass.Rate w/o RL Models
> Qwen series models
> Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct 7B 28.9 45.0 75.9 61.9 Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct [SafeCoder*] 7B 19.2 43.5 87.2 70.8 Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct [PrimeVul+, ours] 7B 32 .7↑3.8% 47 .8↑2.8% 86 .0↑10 .1% 70 .3↑8.4%
> DeepSeek series models
> DeepSeek-Coder-Instruct 6.7B 25.0 32.0 57.4 57.9 DeepSeek-Coder-Instruct [SafeCoder*] 6.7B 23.1 24.0 60.4 72.3 DeepSeek-Coder-Instruct [PrimeVul+, ours] 6.7B 30 .8↑5.8% 34 .9↑2.9% 82 .5↑25 .1% 62 .9↑5.0%
> Codellama series models
> Codellama-Instruct-hf 7B 13.5 21.7 67.2 62.9 Codellama-hf [SafeCoder] 7B 8.4 11.8 80.5 72.3 Codellama-Instruct-hf [PrimeVul+, ours] 7B 26 .9↑13 .4% 30 .4↑8.7% 83 .0↑15 .8% 73 .8↑10 .9%
> RL Models (Using Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct as the backbone) Vanilla PPO 7B 26.9 45.8 84.5 65.8 Purpcode 14B 25.0 52.0 89.2 69.8 SRCode (ours) 7B 38.5 ↑9.6% 54.2 ↑9.2% 88 .7↑12 .8% 74.8 ↑12 .9%

Table 1: Main Results. We present the results under the experimental setup described in Section 4.1. FS@1 , i.e., func-sec@1, evaluates both the correctness and security of the code; Sec.Rate and Pass.Rate both represent the proportion of securely implemented code out of the total samples; the higher is better. [PrimeVul+] indicates the model trained using our dataset; [SafeCoder] indicates the model provided by the authors; [SafeCoder*] indicates the model trained by us using the authors’ dataset and setting. We highlight the best and second-best results, and calculate the improvements of our method compared to the baselines without security optimizations. 

Pro benchmarks (Yu et al., 2024). Detailed experi-mental settings are provided in Appendix C. 

Baselines. To systematically evaluate the per-formance of proposed SRCode framework, we select the representative open-source instruction-fine-tuned large models, including Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct, DeepSeek-Coder-Instruct, and CodeLlama-Instruct. In comparative experiments, we further introduce SafeCoder (He et al., 2024) and DiSCo (Hasan et al., 2025) as additional ref-erences. Regarding RL optimization methods, we choose the classic PPO approach and the recent high-quality work Purpcode (Liu et al., 2025) as baselines. These were compared with the proposed SRCode to verify whether it outperforms existing security fine-tuning methods. 

Evaluation. We comprehensively evaluate the model-generated code via a combination of static analysis, execution testing, and general-purpose benchmarks to ensure the reliability of our analysis. For pass@1, we report the results using 64 inde-pendent samples. Further details of benchmarks and metrics can be found in Appendix B. 

4.2 RQ1: Effectiveness Improvement Analysis 

To address RQ1, we conduct a systematic evalua-tion of various models under identical experimen-tal conditions. The evaluation aims to quantify the direct security benefits of the proposed SRCode method while simultaneously examining its poten-tial impact on code functional correctness. Overall, the results, as shown in Table 1, clearly demon-strate that SRCode exhibits significant advantages across all key security metrics. In particular, these results empirically validate the effectiveness and generalizability of the pro-posed PrimeVul+ dataset in guiding models to learn secure coding behaviors (see the upper part of Table 1). Specifically, without RL, significant variations in security metrics are observed across different architectures and model families. However, after fine-tuning on PrimeVul+, all models achieve con-sistent and substantial gains in code security, with an average increase of 9.39%. Among them, the Codellama model achieves the most pronounced av-erage improvement of 12.20%, while the DeepSeek model demonstrates an even higher improvement of 25.1% on CodeLMSec. After introducing RL, the methods with RL demonstrate an overall positive impact on the safety performance of baseline models (see the lower part of Table 1). However, traditional PPO exhibits a 2.0% decline in the FS@1 metric compared to the baseline, indicating that without explicit safety objective constraints, traditional PPO tends to pri-oritize optimizing the overall reward signal. This 6tendency leads to capability degradation in com-plex safety scenarios. The further comparison with Purpcode reveals that its GRPO-based optimization strategy achieves commendable results across mul-tiple metrics. Nevertheless, even against this highly competitive baseline model, SRCode demonstrates sustained and significant advantages. Notably, the 7B model trained with SRCode even outperforms the Purpcode’s 14B model on nearly all security metrics. This observation implies that the perfor-mance gains primarily stem from the method’s ef-fective guidance of the model, while also enabling the model to learn security coding conventions with strong transferability. 

4.3 RQ2: Reliability of Safety Improvements 

In security code generation tasks, the focus is not on the model’s rote memorization of specific vul-nerability patterns, but rather on its ability to learn security coding behaviors with generalization ca-pabilities. Consequently, we analyze and discuss RQ2. Under a unified training setup, we evaluate multiple models spanning different architectures and scales, with the results reported in Table 2.                                          

> Method CWEval CodeLMSec CyberSecEval
> FS@1(C/C++) Sec.Rate Pass.Rate
> Qwen2.5-Coder-3B-Instruct
> Base LLM 21.2 73.4 60.9
> DiSCo 15.4 76.4 58.4
> SafeCoder 13.5 76.7 65.8
> SRCode ( Ours )23.1 79.0 65.4
> Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct
> Base LLM 28.9 75.9 61.9
> DiSCo 23.1 80.0 57.9
> SafeCoder 19.2 87.2 70.8
> SRCode ( Ours )38.5 88.7 74.8
> DeepSeek-Coder-6.7B-Instruct
> Base LLM 25.0 57.4 57.9
> DiSCo 21.2 84.0 57.4
> SafeCoder 23.1 60.4 72.3
> SRCode ( Ours )32.7 86.7 73.8

Table 2: Comparison of security-enhanced code gen-eration methods. The best results are in bold. 

The overall results show that existing security enhancement methods fail to deliver the expected security improvements in certain scenarios, even exhibiting performance degradation across multiple benchmarks. Despite incorporating substantial se-curity examples during training, these approaches fundamentally rely on pattern-level memorization rather than semantic-level reasoning. In contrast, SRCode achieves stable and significant improve-ments across all models and benchmarks. Taking the Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct as an ex-ample, it achieves improvements of 9.6%, 12.8%, and 12.9% across three metrics, representing the best results within its group. This further demon-strates that the SRCode training strategy enhances transferable and generalizable structured security reasoning capabilities, whose effectiveness is inde-pendent of specific model scale or architecture. The in-depth analysis of vulnerability counts at different severity levels (high, medium, low) is pro-vided in Appendix E, which confirms that SRCode delivers stable and reliable safety improvements across models of varying scales and architectures. 

4.4 RQ3: Module Contribution Analysis 

Table 3 presents the ablation study results. Overall, removing each module individually leads to vary-ing degrees of performance degradation in SRCode. First, the model without SFT shows a 4 ∼ 5% de-cline across all metrics, particularly on tasks involv-ing multi-step pointer operations, memory copying, and boundary-sensitive logic. Without this stage, models trained solely through RL generated code that is more prone to vulnerabilities in CWEval dynamic testing. This indicates that lacking SFT weakens the model’s foundational understanding of secure coding conventions and significantly im-pacts the effectiveness of RL training.                                       

> Method CWEval CodeLMSec CyberSecEval
> SFT RL TLR FS@1 Sec.Rate Pass.Rate
> ✔✔✔38.5 88.7 74.8
> ✗✔✔34.6 86.7 67.3
> ✔✗✗32.7 85.9 68.8
> ✔✔✗30.8 83.9 66.8
> ✗✔✗26.9 84.5 65.8
> ✗✗✗28.9 75.9 61.9

Table 3: Ablation study on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct. SFT refers to supervised fine-tuning on the PrimeVul+, RL refers to reinforcement learning using PPO, and TLR refers to the token-level rewards. 

Second, when the RL phase is removed, the FS@1 metric of models shows a significant de-cline, with the synergistic performance of function-ality and security markedly deteriorating, reflect-ing a classic alignment tax phenomenon. Perfor-mance also drops by 2.8% and 6.0% on CodeLM-Sec and CyberSecEval, respectively. The model first learns fundamental functional correctness on the SFT foundation while acquiring preliminary code security implementation. Crucially, it should progressively learn vulnerability-fixing strategies 7Figure 2: Comparison of Sampling Efficiency Gaps ( ∆SE ). A smaller ∆SE indicates that the RL-trained model is closer to the theoretical performance upper bound of the base model under large-k sampling. 

during the RL phase to achieve a reliable balance between functional correctness and security. Finally, with TLR removed, all metrics exhibit a clear decline, particularly in the model’s fine-grained performance for complex security scenar-ios. This degradation is most pronounced in tasks involving ambiguous trigger conditions and vul-nerabilities caused by the single-character errors. Appendix G further presents a case study to intu-itively illustrate the advantages of TLR. Besides, more detailed analysis and the ablation results on PrimeVul+ dataset are provided in Appendix D. 

4.5 RQ4: Generalization Analysis and Sampling Efficiency 

To verify whether improving code security comes at the cost of utility, we evaluate SRCode over HumanEval Pro and MBPP Pro, two more com-prehensive datasets for testing general code gener-ation capabilities with self-calling and code reuse requirements, as shown in Table 4.                     

> Model HumanEval Pro MBPP Pro
> Qwen2.5-Coder-3B-Instruct 59.1 55.0
> w/ SRCode 60 .4↑1.3% 55 .6↑0.6%
> Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct 65.9 64.8
> w/ SRCode 69 .5↑3.6% 64.8
> DeepSeek-Coder-6.7B-Instruct 55.6 57.1
> w/ SRCode 55.6 57 .9↑0.8%
> Table 4: Evaluation of general code generation capa-bility for the models with SRCode (i.e., w/SRCode).

It can be observed from Table 4 that across three base models of varying scales and architectures, SRCode does not cause any performance degra-dation, maintaining stable overall performance with the improvements in some cases. Concretely, Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct achieves a significant 3.6% increase on HumanEval Pro, while others also show modest gains across various benchmarks. This demonstrates that SRCode enhances model safety without compromising general capabilities, instead further strengthening generalization and ro-bustness. Particularly for small-to-medium-sized models, SRCode’s structured safety training frame-work delivers additional performance gains, en-abling models to maintain high-quality code gener-ation across a broader range of tasks. To better reflect realistic user scenarios with lim-ited sampling budgets, we further examine the sam-pling efficiency of SRCode. As shown in Figure 2, SRCode consistently exhibits superior sampling efficiency especially under the low-sample settings (better reflecting real-world user experience), en-abling models to produce more secure and higher-quality code with fewer candidates. The detailed analysis is supplemented in Appendix F. 

5 Conclusions 

In this work, we first designed the Vul2Safe secure code generation framework, and then constructed the PrimeVul+ dataset for building a highly trust-worthy code security corpus from real-world vul-nerable code to strengthen the model’s security per-ception at the data level. Upon this foundation, we further introduced the SRCode training framework, which pioneers the incorporation of the token-level rewards into reinforcement learning for secure code generation, effectively enhancing the model’s fine-grained security reasoning capabilities. Experiments demonstrated that our constructed data and proposed training framework significantly improved the security performance across multiple evaluation benchmarks while enhancing the over-all code quality. Future work will explore richer forms of security reasoning and cross-language vul-nerability patterns to continuously strengthen the security robustness in real-world scenarios. 8Limitations 

Although SRCode achieves significant results in enhancing secure code generation, it still has some limitations. First, our method is based on the PPO algorithm framework, and its clip hard-clipping mechanism may limit the influence of token-level rewards on policy updates under certain special circumstances. For instance, when advantage val-ues are large or gradient directions are strong, the clip operation may compress the effective gradients corresponding to fine-grained rewards, potentially weakening the security signals of critical tokens during updates. It should be noted that this effect primarily manifests under extreme gradient condi-tions and does not significantly impair the method’s overall effectiveness in terms of training process or final performance. Future work will explore gentler clipping strategies or alternative optimiza-tion algorithms to further mitigate gradient decay issues for fine-grained rewards under extreme con-ditions. Additionally, SRCode relies on teacher models for code security judgments and feedback during training, meaning training quality is con-strained by the teacher model’s security knowledge and reasoning capabilities. Reducing dependence on teacher model performance represents a promis-ing avenue for future exploration. Moreover, our training data includes real-world vulnerable code and security-critical examples, which could be mis-used for malicious training purposes, resulting in models that generate insecure code and potentially cause harm when deployed if applied outside the intended security-oriented setting. Finally, our cur-rent experiments and evaluations primarily focus on C/C++ code security scenarios, where mem-ory safety and underlying vulnerabilities are par-ticularly prominent. Although SRCode’s overall framework and training strategy are not language-specific, different programming languages exhibit significant differences in vulnerability types and security patterns. Therefore, systematic evaluation across more programming languages and security tasks is still needed to validate the method’s gener-ality and applicability. 

Acknowledgments References 

Loubna Ben Allal, Raymond Li, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Christopher Akiki, Carlos Munoz Ferrandis, Niklas Muennighoff, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Manan Dey, and 1 others. 2023. Santa-coder: don’t reach for the stars! arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03988 .Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and 1 others. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 .Mark Chen. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Shih-Chieh Dai, Jun Xu, and Guanhong Tao. 2025. A comprehensive study of llm secure code generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15554 .Yangruibo Ding, Yanjun Fu, Omniyyah Ibrahim, Chawin Sitawarin, Xinyun Chen, Basel Alomair, David Wagner, Baishakhi Ray, and Yizheng Chen. 2024. Vulnerability detection with code language models: How far are we? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18624 .Shihan Dou, Yan Liu, Haoxiang Jia, Enyu Zhou, Limao Xiong, Junjie Shan, Caishuang Huang, Xiao Wang, Xiaoran Fan, Zhiheng Xi, Yuhao Zhou, Tao Ji, Rui Zheng, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, and Xuanjing Huang. 2024. StepCoder: Improving code generation with reinforcement learning from compiler feedback. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4571–4585. Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2024. Evaluating large language models in class-level code generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering , pages 1–13. Lishui Fan, Yu Zhang, Mouxiang Chen, and Zhongxin Liu. 2025. Posterior-grpo: Rewarding reason-ing processes in code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05170 .GitHub. 2024. Codeql. https://codeql.github.co m/ .Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Yu Wu, YK Li, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming–the rise of code intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196 .Hossein Hajipour, Keno Hassler, Thorsten Holz, Lea Schönherr, and Mario Fritz. 2024a. Codelmsec benchmark: Systematically evaluating and finding security vulnerabilities in black-box code language models. In 2024 IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML) , pages 684– 709. IEEE. Hossein Hajipour, Lea Schönherr, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. 2024b. Hexacoder: Secure code genera-tion via oracle-guided synthetic training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.06446 .

9Mohammad Saqib Hasan, Saikat Chakraborty, Santu Karmaker, and Niranjan Balasubramanian. 2025. Teaching an old LLM secure coding: Localized pref-erence optimization on distilled preferences. In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 26039–26057. Jingxuan He and Martin Vechev. 2023. Large language models for code: Security hardening and adversarial testing. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Secu-rity , pages 1865–1879. Jingxuan He, Mark Vero, Gabriela Krasnopolska, and Martin Vechev. 2024. Instruction tuning for secure code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09497 .Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John Grundy, and Haoyu Wang. 2024. Large language models for software engineering: A systematic literature re-view. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 33(8):1–79. Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, and 1 others. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3. Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, and 1 others. 2024. Qwen2.5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186 .Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gon-zalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient memory management for large language model serv-ing with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th symposium on operating systems principles , pages 611–626. Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. 2022. Coderl: Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:21314–21328. Qingyao Li, Xinyi Dai, Xiangyang Li, Weinan Zhang, Yasheng Wang, Ruiming Tang, and Yong Yu. 2025. CodePRM: Execution feedback-enhanced process reward model for code generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 8169–8182. Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, and 1 others. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161 .Jiate Liu, Yiqin Zhu, Kaiwen Xiao, Qiang Fu, Xiao Han, Wei Yang, and Deheng Ye. 2023. Rltf: Reinforce-ment learning from unit test feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04349 .Jiawei Liu, Nirav Diwan, Zhe Wang, Haoyu Zhai, Xi-aona Zhou, Kiet A Nguyen, Tianjiao Yu, Muntasir Wahed, Yinlin Deng, Hadjer Benkraouda, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Purpcode: Reasoning for safer code gener-ation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19060 .Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco, Colin Clement, Dawn Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang, and 1 others. 2021. Codexglue: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04664 .Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xi-ubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu, Chongyang Tao, Jing Ma, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. 2023. Wizardcoder: Empowering code large language models with evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08568 .Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow in-structions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Weihang Ouyang, Min Zhu, Wei Xiong, Si-Wei Liu, and Lu Lu. 2025. Rams: Residual-based adversarial-gradient moving sample method for scientific ma-chine learning in solving partial differential equations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01234 .OWASP Foundation. 2025. Owasp top 10 for large language model applications. https://owasp.org/ www-project-top-10-for-large-language-m odel-applications/assets/PDF/OWASP-Top-1 0-for-LLMs-v2025.pdf . Version 2025, accessed January 2025. Eunil Park. 2025. Continuance use of ai coding assis-tants among south korean industry developers: A survey case study with large language models. Em-pirical Software Engineering , 30(6):1–24. Jinjun Peng, Leyi Cui, Kele Huang, Junfeng Yang, and Baishakhi Ray. 2025. Cweval: Outcome-driven eval-uation on functionality and security of llm code gen-eration. In 2025 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Large Language Models for Code (LLM4Code) ,pages 33–40. IEEE. Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, and 1 others. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 .John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proxi-mal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Parshin Shojaee, Aneesh Jain, Sindhu Tipirneni, and Chandan K Reddy. 2023. Execution-based code gen-eration using deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13816 .

10 Benyamin Tabarsi, Heidi Reichert, Sam Gilson, Ally Limke, Sandeep Kuttal, and Tiffany Barnes. 2025. Llms’ reshaping of people, processes, products, and society in software development: A comprehen-sive exploration with early adopters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05012 .Shengye Wan, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Daniel Song, David Molnar, James Crnkovich, Jayson Grace, Manish Bhatt, Sahana Chennabasappa, Spencer Whitman, Stephanie Ding, and 1 others. 2024. Cyberseceval 3: Advancing the evaluation of cybersecurity risks and capabilities in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01605 .Jiexin Wang, Liuwen Cao, Xitong Luo, Zhiping Zhou, Jiayuan Xie, Adam Jatowt, and Yi Cai. 2023. Enhanc-ing large language models for secure code generation: A dataset-driven study on vulnerability mitigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16263 .Shenao Wang, Yanjie Zhao, Xinyi Hou, and Haoyu Wang. 2025. Large language model supply chain: A research agenda. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 34(5):1–46. Ronald J. Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine Learning , 8(3-4):229–256. HanXiang Xu, ShenAo Wang, Ningke Li, Kailong Wang, Yanjie Zhao, Kai Chen, Ting Yu, Yang Liu, and HaoYu Wang. 2024a. Large language models for cyber security: A systematic literature review. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Method-ology .Xiangzhe Xu, Zian Su, Jinyao Guo, Kaiyuan Zhang, Zhenting Wang, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2024b. Prosec: Fortifying code llms with proactive security align-ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12882 .Feng Yao, Zilong Wang, Liyuan Liu, Junxia Cui, Li Zhong, Xiaohan Fu, Haohui Mai, Vish Krishnan, Jianfeng Gao, and Jingbo Shang. 2025. Training lan-guage models to generate quality code with program analysis feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22704 .Zhaojian Yu, Yilun Zhao, Arman Cohan, and Xiao-Ping Zhang. 2024. Humaneval pro and mbpp pro: Evaluating large language models on self-invoking code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.21199 .Yuanliang Zhang, Yifan Xie, Shanshan Li, Ke Liu, Chong Wang, Zhouyang Jia, Xiangbing Huang, Jie Song, Chaopeng Luo, Zhizheng Zheng, Rulin Xu, Yitong Liu, Si Zheng, and Xiangke Liao. 2025. Un-seen horizons: Unveiling the real capability of llm code generation beyond the familiar. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering , page 604–615. Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yan-han Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi Feng, and Yongqiang Ma. 2024. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13372 .

A Methodology Details and Algorithm 

In this section, we first supplement the analysis of advantages of the token-level rewards (TLR) mechanism. The necessary background and prelim-inaries have been introduced in Section 3.3. When 

|T | ≪ Li (where T is the set of secure tokens and 

Li is the length of generated code sequence Si) and only sentence-level rewards are employed, all to-kens share the same sequence-level reward. As a result, safety-critical tokens contribute only a negligible portion of the reward signal when com-puting the advantage A j (the advantage of token t j

in sequence Si). Their gradients are therefore sig-nificantly diluted, making it difficult to effectively reinforce safety structures within code segments. In contrast, token-level positive reinforcement can provide fine-grained, strongly directive learning signals that significantly outperform sentence-level rewards in learning local security patterns. In secure code generation tasks, vulnerabilities are rarely caused directly by a single token but rather stem from structural errors such as missing code logic, insufficient condition checks, or im-proper resource usage. Such errors are generally difficult to accurately identify through local attri-bution to individual tokens. Therefore, when the teacher model determines that sequence Si contains a vulnerability, we employ a negative reward r−

> token

as shown in Equation (2) . This design ensures that each token’s contribution to the policy gradient shifts toward reducing the overall probability of the vulnerable sequence. After incorporating this re-ward into the advantage term, gradient updates still follow Equation (9) . If vulnerabilities exist in the code sequence, the uniform distribution of negative rewards across all tokens ensures the advantage function maintains consistent sign and magnitude, thereby avoiding gradient noise and instability po-tentially caused by single-token negative rewards. Based on this analysis, token-level positive re-wards and sentence-level negative rewards form a complementary relationship in the optimization objective: the former aims to strengthen the cor-rect generation of local secure code patterns, while the latter aims to globally penalize structural errors that lead to vulnerabilities. When a token belongs to a secure pattern, the advantage function is pri-marily determined by r+

> token

, and the policy update gradient moves toward reinforcing secure tokens; When the code sequence contains vulnerabilities, the advantage function updates the gradient toward 11 reducing the generation probability of the entire code segment. Since the two reward types act on different levels of the code structure, this mecha-nism simultaneously ensures learning of local code security implementation and punishment of global vulnerability patterns. From the perspective of op-timization objectives, the above mechanism can be formalized as an expectation-based optimization objective, as shown in Equation (10) below:    

> Jsecure PPO =E(qi,t)∼πφ′
> "Li−1

## ∑               

> j=0
> min  ρi,j×Asecure (qi,tj),
> clip  ρi,j,1−ε,1+ε×Asecure (qi,tj) (10)

In practical training, since the objective is diffi-cult to compute directly, we approximate its opti-mization by unfolding the sampled sequence and accumulating the objective at the token level. To align with secure code generation scenarios, we unfold each generated sequence within a batch and sum the objective functions across all tokens, as shown in Equation (8) . Algorithm 1 illustrates the training details of SRCode’s RL phase. 

Algorithm 1 SRCode RL Training.                                                                          

> 1: Input : Training samples qi, policy model πθ, teacher model, value network Vφ
> 2: Output : Updated policy model θ
> 3: Token Generation
> 4: for each query qido
> 5: Generate code sequence Si= ( t0, . . . , tLi−1)using πθ
> 6: Reward Construction
> 7: Teacher extracts secure token set Tand vulnerability status Vul (Si)
> 8: for each token tjdo
> 9: Assign positive reward if tj∈T
> 10: Assign negative penalty if Vul (Si) = True 11: Compute final reward ri,jusing Eq. (3) 12: end for
> 13: Advantage Computation (GAE)
> 14: for each token tjdo
> 15: Compute TD residual δi,jusing Eq. (5) 16: Compute advantage Asecure (qi,tj)using Eq.(6) 17: end for
> 18: PPO Objective
> 19: for each token tjdo
> 20: Compute importance ratio ρi,jusing Eq. (8) 21: Compute clipped PPO term 22: Compute token-level objective Ji,jusing Eq. (7) 23: end for
> 24: end for
> 25: Policy Update
> 26: Update policy parameters θusing Eq.(9)

B Evaluation Details 

Our evaluation consists of two main components, designed to measure the model’s performance in code generation safety and code generation general capability, respectively. For code safety evaluation, three representative security benchmarks are em-ployed: CWEval (Peng et al., 2025), CodeLMSec (Hajipour et al., 2024a), and CyberSecEval (Wan et al., 2024). For general code generation capability assessment, we utilize two extended and enhanced classic code generation benchmarks: HumanEval Pro and MBPP Pro (Yu et al., 2024). 

CWEval. We employ the FS@1 (func-sec@1) metric to simultaneously evaluate generated code across functional correctness and security dimen-sions. A code instance is counted as successful only when it passes both functional tests and sat-isfies security constraints. The specific formula of FS@1 is as follows: FS@1 = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> i=1

I ( f ( ˆci) ∧ s( ˆci)) 

where N denotes the total number of evaluation samples, and ˆci represents the first code sample generated by the model for the ith input. The function f (·) is the functional correctness evalu-ation function, returning "True" when the gener-ated code passes the corresponding functional test, and "False" otherwise. Function s(·) denotes the safety verification function, returning "True" when the generated code satisfies security constraints and contains no known vulnerabilities or insecure implementations, and "False" otherwise. The in-dicator function I(·) takes the value "1" when its condition holds, and "0" otherwise. Additionally, building upon the C/C++ task, we supplement our evaluation using its provided Python subset to ob-serve the model’s generalization performance in cross-language security modes. 

CodeLMSec. This evaluation benchmark uses the CodeQL analyzer to inspect model-generated code. Analysis of its built-in query file collection reveals limited coverage of CWE vulnerabilities. To address this, we supplement the analysis with an additional query set provided by CodeQL. This set contains 181 security query files tailored for C/C++ scenarios, thereby enhancing vulnerability detec-tion coverage and result reliability. The Sec.Rate metric is employed to quantitatively evaluate the security of model-generated code. Specifically, we perform multiple repeated samples of tasks from the evaluation set and use CodeQL to detect vul-nerabilities in each sample. The Sec.Rate metric is defined as the proportion of valid generated sam-ples that remain undetected for vulnerabilities, cal-12 culated as follows: Sec.Rate =



1 − Insecure Generations Valid Generations 



× 100% 

CyberSecEval. As CyberSecEval is a collection of security evaluation benchmarks, we focus on the tasks within this collection that emphasize secure code generation. These tasks are referred to as “in-struct tests” in the original benchmark. We adopt the official Pass.Rate metric for security evaluation, which measures the proportion of samples passing security evaluation within a category. To be more specific, it is defined as the percentage of evalua-tion items in which no security vulnerabilities are detected among all evaluated items. Similar to the Sec.Rate metric, Pass.Rate also measures the pro-portion of generated results passing security checks, but it aggregates statistics at the task level rather than the sample level. 

HumanEval Pro and MBPP Pro. HumanEval Pro and MBPP Pro are enhanced versions built upon the classic code generation benchmarks Hu-manEval (Chen, 2021) and MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), designed to evaluate models’ comprehen-sive capabilities in self-calling code generation sce-narios. Unlike the original benchmarks that focus solely on single-function generation, these two Pro versions require models to correctly reuse their own code after generating a base solution to complete more complex derivative tasks. This simultane-ously evaluates models’ code generation capabil-ities, progressive reasoning abilities, and consis-tency in code reuse and invocation. Regarding eval-uation metrics, we adopt the unbiased estimation method for pass@ k proposed in prior work to as-sess model performance (Chen, 2021). Specifically, for each problem, we first generate n code samples and count the number of samples that pass the test as c. Subsequently, pass@ k is defined as the prob-ability that at least one correct sample is included when randomly selecting k samples from these n

samples. Its mathematical form is as follows: pass@ k = E

"

1 −

 n−ck

 nk

#

where (n − c) denotes the number of code samples that failed testing. The term (n−ck )(nk) represents the probability that all k randomly selected samples are erroneous code. This unbiased estimation method effectively reduces evaluation variance under finite sampling conditions and is widely used in code generation benchmark assessments. 

C Setup Details 

All training and evaluation are conducted on two NVIDIA H100 80G GPUs, amounting to approxi-mately 60 hours of total GPU time. Training and optimization for all models are performed using the LLaMAFactory framework (Zheng et al., 2024), employing a unified training workflow and hyperpa-rameter settings. The low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) is introduced during training to achieve efficient parameter fine-tuning. LoRA is configured with a rank of 8 and scaling factor of 16, without dropout, and applied to all adapt-able layers in the model. The LoRA settings re-main consistent across both supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning phases. For evaluation benchmarks, all models are locally deployed via the vLLM framework (Kwon et al., 2023) on the same GPU environment. For the code safety evaluation benchmark, we uniformly set the sampling temper-ature to 0.8 for models with parameter sizes of at least 6.7B, and to 0.6 for all other models. For the code generation general capability benchmark, we uniformly set the temperature to 0. For all pass@1 metrics, we estimate results using 64 independent samples to ensure experimental reliability. During supervised fine-tuning, models are trained on instruction-response format data with a maximum input sequence length of 2048. Training employs the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 5 × 10 −5 and a cosine learning rate scheduling strategy. Each GPU employed a batch size of 2 dur-ing training, achieving an equivalent batch size of 16 via 8-step gradient accumulation. The gradient clipping threshold is set to 1.0. All training is con-ducted at BF16 precision to balance computational efficiency and numerical stability. During the reinforcement learning phase, LoRA is also employed for efficient parameter training. A reward model fine-tuned using LoRA is loaded for return computation. Furthermore, Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct is selected as the teacher model, with both the positive reward α and the upper bound of negative rewards for token-level rewards set to 0.2. The learning rate for reinforce-ment learning remains consistent with the super-vised fine-tuning phase, and all hyperparameters are identical. During policy generation, we employ a top-p sampling strategy set to 0.9 without top-k 13 truncation to enhance diversity in generated out-puts. At the implementation level, all experiments utilize Flash Attention’s auto-optimization mode and run in a distributed training environment. 

D Extended Ablation Study for SRCode 

In this section, we first conduct an in-depth analysis of the results presented in Table 3. Notably, we ob-serve an intriguing and insightful phenomenon on the CodeLMSec benchmark: models trained solely with RL perform marginally better than the SFT + RL variant. Reasonably inferring the cause, we find that CodeLMSec prompts are reverse-engineered by the model, exhibiting strong adversarial prop-erties and weak semantic constraints. RL mod-els without TLR directly update parameters based on instance-level security rewards during training, leading them to adopt more conservative output strategies when encountering such inputs. This training-evaluation consistency yields a slight score improvement but does not imply that such models possess higher security or generalization capabili-ties in real-world code generation tasks. A similar pattern emerges in Table 1 when comparing our proposed SRCode with Purpcode. Second, to further validate the effectiveness of the hierarchical data design, we conduct additional ablation experiments on the security evaluation benchmark CodeLMSec and the general code gen-eration benchmark HumanEval Pro, with the results as shown in Table 5.                    

> Method CodeLMSec HumanEval Pro
> Sec.Rate pass@1
> SRCode 88.7 69.5
> w/o repair task 83.2 68.1
> w/o progressive order 85.5 66.6
> w/o explicit order 86.2 69.1
> Table 5: Ablation study for the hierarchical data de-sign. We evaluate the effectiveness of curriculum data design on a security benchmark and a general code gen-eration benchmark. w/o repair task denotes removing the intermediate-difficulty vulnerability repair task; w/o progressive order indicates breaking the progressive difficulty ordering of tasks; w/o explicit order refers to randomly mixing tasks of different difficulty levels without an explicit curriculum structure.

The overall results show that the complete hi-erarchical dataset achieves optimal performance on both benchmarks, indicating that organizing data in ascending order of difficulty can simulta-neously enhance both the model’s code security and its general code generation capabilities. When medium-difficulty vulnerability remediation tasks are removed, the model’s performance on the se-curity evaluation benchmark declines significantly. This demonstrates that vulnerability remediation tasks serve as a crucial intermediate stage, bridging the transition from vulnerability identification to secure code generation. Regarding the configurations that disrupt the difficulty progression or randomly mixed tasks of varying difficulty, the model exhibits varying degrees of performance drop. This observation demonstrates that the task sequence itself could significantly impact the model’s ability to progres-sively learn complex code generation. Note that, in the randomly mixed task setting, the model’s per-formance on the general capability evaluation ap-proaches that of the complete dataset configuration. However, it still shows a gap in security metrics, further indicating that the explicit hierarchical data structure is more effective in consistently enhanc-ing secure code generation capabilities. 

E Vulnerability Distribution Analysis 

Figure 3 shows that compared to various baseline models, SRCode achieves a significant reduction in both high-risk and medium-risk vulnerabilities, demonstrating greater robustness and reliability in mitigating the most security-threatening severe vul-nerabilities. Simultaneously, compared to existing security enhancement methods, SRCode exhibits an overwhelming advantage in reducing the over-all number of vulnerabilities. Regardless of model size or structure, SRCode consistently achieves the lowest vulnerability count among all methods. These observations further support RQ2, show-ing that SRCode provides reliable safety improve-ments across models with different scales and archi-tectures. The consistent reduction in vulnerability counts suggests that these gains are stable and not limited to specific model settings. 

F Sampling Efficiency Analysis 

The experimental results on sampling efficiency gaps have been illustrated in Figure 2 (in the main paper). Note that, lower sampling counts better re-flect real-world user experience, as practical usage typically involves only a small number of candidate generations. To enable a fair and precise compari-son of RL-induced improvements, all base models 14 Figure 3: Vulnerability distribution on CodeLMSec across different methods. The number of High, Medium, and Low severity vulnerabilities are reported, representing high-risk, medium-risk, and low-risk security issues, respectively. Each subplot is for a specific base model. Lower vulnerability counts indicate safer model behavior. 

are uniformly set to their SFT-only versions. We observe from Figure 2 that SRCode achieves the optimal performance on this metric, with a value of only 0.234, significantly outperforming traditional PPO and Purpcode. Furthermore, un-der the k = 1 and k = 2 settings that more closely resemble real-world user scenarios, the sampling efficiency of SRCode is improved by 5.77% and 3.55% respectively compared to the baseline model, while the other two methods exhibit varying de-grees of decline. This phenomenon indicates that under the low-sample constraints, the fine-grained token-level rewards mechanism introduced by SR-Code more effectively guides the model toward strategy optimization. This enables it to generate higher-quality, more secure code without requiring extensive candidate sampling. 

G Case Study and Discussions 

To more intuitively demonstrate the advantages of the TLR mechanism in the SRCode framework for secure code generation, we select a typical memory security task from CWEval and conduct the case study for the generation results from models with and without TLR enabled. 

Task Description. The case study focuses on a CWE-125 (Out-of-Bounds Read) related task: the model must safely parse array indices from strings, returning −1 for non-numeric characters, negative values, and out-of-bounds cases, while strictly adhering to the controlled error interface specification, i.e., it must not terminate the program via exit () or similar methods. Since vulnerability risks concentrate on critical tokens like boundary check conditions and return value handling, this task effectively tests whether the model possesses fine-grained security reasoning capabilities. 

Results Analysis. The output of traditional PPO is shown in Listing 1. Although it performs su-perficial index validity checks, it chooses to print error messages and call exit () to terminate the pro-gram when handling invalid inputs. This violates task constraints and introduces typical Denial-of-Service risks. This implementation reflects that traditional PPO still tends to adopt coarse-grained, generic error handling patterns when confronting local security constraints, lacking precise judgment of critical security semantics.                

> Listing 1: The result of PPO
> if (* endptr != ’ \ 0 ’ || index <0|| index >= size ) {fprintf ( stderr , " I n v a l i d i n d e x : %s \ n " ,index_str ); exit ( EXIT_FAILURE ); }

In contrast, the output of SRCode (List 2) strictly adheres to the task specifications. It directly returns 

−1 upon detecting failed index resolution, negative values, or out-of-bounds access, while maintaining a concise function structure and minimizing modi-fications. This implementation fully incorporates critical security checks, avoiding any actions that could disrupt control flow.             

> Listing 2: The result of SRCode
> if (* endptr != ’ \ 0 ’ || index <0|| index >= ( long ) size ) {return -1; }

It is worth noting that the core difference lies in the granularity of reward signals. PPO’s instance-level rewards can only provide vague feedback on overall results at the sequence level, causing the model to learn only coarse safety code templates, such as terminating upon encountering errors. In contrast, the SRCode’s TLR mechanism precisely applies rewards to critical tokens, explicitly guiding 15 the model to execute norm-compliant repair logic at specific local positions. This case study clearly demonstrates that for structured tasks with highly concentrated security semantics, TLR effectively avoids PPO’s global replacement-style fixes. It enables the model to generate localized, secure, and controllable code while preserving functional correctness, highlighting SRCode’s core capability in fine-grained security reasoning. Although TLR can provide fine-grained secu-rity reward signals for secure code generation, its effectiveness under the existing PPO framework is inevitably constrained by the hard clipping im-posed by the clip operation. The clip mechanism in PPO aims to ensure training stability by limiting the range of change in the ratio between the old and new policy probabilities, thereby preventing ex-cessive policy updates. However, in practice, this mechanism may forcibly truncate advantageous items when the advantage value is large, the gradi-ent direction is pronounced, or a token significantly contributes to safety semantics. This phenomenon may weaken the model’s learning effectiveness in long sequence generation tasks and certain complex control flow scenarios. Overall, this limitation does not diminish TLR’s overall advantages. However, it reveals constraints between fine-grained rewards and stability mechanisms within the current PPO framework, pointing to a promising research direc-tion for exploring more flexible policy optimization methods in the future. 

H Prompts    

> Category Prompt
> Vul2Safe framework Generate Security Patch Code (Listing 3) LLM Self-Reflection (Listing 4) PrimeVul+ Dataset Vulnerable Code Detection (Listing 5) Code Repair (Listing 6) Secure Code Generation (Listing 7) RL Training Teaching Model Reward (Listing 8)

Table 6: Overview of prompt implementations. 

Table 6 comprehensively summarizes the prompt implementations used in this work, covering key prompt designs involved in the Vul2Safe frame-work, the construction of the PrimeVul+ dataset, and the reinforcement learning training stage. Specifically, the Vul2Safe framework includes prompts for generating vulnerability repair code and for large language model self-reflection; the PrimeVul+ dataset comprises prompts correspond-ing to three different task types; and as for the rein-forcement learning stage, we provide prompts for the teacher-model–based reward generation. The detailed implementations of these prompts are pre-sented in the following listings. 

Listing 3: Prompt for the vulnerability repair stage in Vul2Safe 

System: You are a security-focused code assistant that rewrites C/C++ functions to be safer. User: You are a security-focused C/C++ code assistant. Metadata: - idx: <idx> - project: <project> - commit_id: <commit_id> - commit_message: <commit_message> - cwe: <cwe> - cve: <cve> - cve_desc: <cve_desc> Original function (C/C++): [original C/C++ function] Rewrite Instructions (CRITICAL): 1) Output ONLY one valid C or C++ function definition (no extra text). 2) Keep the function signature (return type, name, and parameters) EXACTLY the same as the original. 3) Preserve all original constants, macros, and symbolic names. 4) If a callee expects an array of requests, use a one-element array rather than passing &req. 5) Insert necessary input validation and defensive checks (e.g., NULL checks, bounds checks, safe string handling). 6) Minimum Editing Constraint: Make the fewest possible text edits to eliminate unsafe behavior. 7) Ensure the output can be compiled by gcc/clang with -fsyntax-only (no syntax errors). 8) Do NOT output explanations, markdown, or extra text outside the function. Now output ONLY the revised secure C/C++ function below: 

Listing 4: Prompt for the self-reflection stage in Vul2Safe 

System: You are a senior C/C++ language and software security expert. You will receive a JSON object with three fields: - "idx": a unique sample ID, - "cwe": the target CWE vulnerability category, - "code": the C/C++ function implementation. Your tasks: 1. Syntax Check (is_incomplete) - Determine whether the C/C++ code is syntactically incomplete or malformed at the basic language level. - Focus only on formal syntax issues such as unclosed braces, missing semicolons, incomplete statements, incorrect keywords, or unclosed parentheses. 

16 - Do NOT treat missing type definitions, external macros, or library functions as syntax errors. - Mark is_incomplete as true if the code is clearly un-compilable due to syntax issues. - Mark is_incomplete as false if the code appears complete and syntactically valid. 2. Security Check (is_safe) - Analyze whether the function is safe only with respect to the given CWE. - Ignore unrelated vulnerabilities or issues outside this CWE category. - If the code likely exhibits the CWE vulnerability, set is_safe to false and provide a concise reason. - If the code mitigates or does not exhibit the vulnerability, set is_safe to true and leave reason empty. Return exactly one JSON object in the following format: {"idx": <same idx as input>, "is_incomplete": true/false, "is_safe": true/false, "reason": "" }

Listing 5: Prompt for vulnerable code detection task 

System: You are a secure code assistant that performs code vulnerability analysis, repair, and secure generation. Task Type: Vulnerability Classification CWE ID: CWE-200 Instruction: Determine whether the following code contains a CWE-200 vulnerability. If a vulnerability exists, output ’vulnerability’; otherwise output ’no_vulnerability’. Input Code: [Real-World Project Code] Expected Output: 

Listing 6: Prompt for code repair task 

System: You are a secure code assistant focused on vulnerability analysis, secure repair, and safe code generation. Task Type: Code Repair CWE ID: CWE-89 Context: The following code snippet is associated with a CWE-89 (SQL Injection) issue. In similar cases, safer implementations avoid unsafe usage patterns or apply appropriate validation or sanitization mechanisms, while preserving the original program behavior. The expected result follows common secure coding practices and satisfies the following properties: - All necessary #include headers are present so the code can compile successfully. - The original logic and functionality are preserved (functional equivalence). - The code compiles without errors or missing symbols. - Consistent and proper C/C++ indentation is used (spaces only). - No markdown code fences appear in the output. Input Code: [Benign code prefix] Expected Output: 

Listing 7: Prompt for secure code generation task 

System: You are a secure code assistant that performs code vulnerability analysis, repair, and secure generation. Task Type: Secure Code Generation CWE ID: CWE-918 Instruction: Implement a secure version of the function for a CWE-918 scenario. The task is defined as follows. Function: php_sockop_stat Purpose: This function retrieves file status information for a network socket stream, enabling system-level attributes (e.g., permissions, size) to be inspected. It is platform-dependent and specifically targets non-Windows environments. Logic: - Windows: Returns 0 unconditionally (unsupported operation). - Non-Windows: 1. Validates input parameters (stream and ssb). Returns -1 if either is NULL. 2. Extracts socket-specific metadata from stream->abstract. 3. Validates the extracted metadata. Returns -1 if invalid. 4. Invokes zend_fstat() to populate ssb->sb with the socket’s file status. Input Expectations: - stream: Must be a valid php_stream pointer referencing an active network stream. - ssb: Must be a non-NULL pointer to a preallocated php_stream_statbuf for storing results. - Internal State: The abstract field of stream must resolve to a valid php_netstream_data_t. Additional Requirements: - All necessary #include headers are present so the code can compile successfully. - The implementation is functionally correct according to the task description. - The code compiles without errors. - Consistent and proper C/C++ indentation is used. - No markdown code fences appear in the output. - Only the final secure and compilable code implementation is produced. Input Code: [Empty] Expected Output: 

Listing 8: Prompt for teacher model evaluation for TLR 

System: You are a code security auditing expert specializing in C/C++ vulnerability detection and secure hardening. Original prompt received by the policy model: {prompt_text} Code generated by the policy model: {code_text} Please complete the task according to the following steps: 1. Required header file check: - Determine whether the code is missing any header files required to complete the task. 

17 - Do NOT provide the repaired code. 2. CWE vulnerability detection: - Determine whether the code contains any CWE vulnerabilities, especially those described in the original prompt. 3. Secure implementation identification: - Mark tokens in the code that correspond to secure implementations (e.g., use of safe functions, correct header files, defensive checks). - Output must be a list in the following format: "correct_tokens": ["token1", "token2", ...] - Do NOT output any natural language explanations. Only output tokens. 4. Minimal repair assessment and negative reward calculation: - Assign a negative reward based on vulnerability severity and missing header files. - If the vulnerability described in the prompt exists, it is considered the most severe. - The reward range is [min, 0], where more severe issues receive larger negative values. - If the code contains no vulnerabilities, then negative_reward = 0. 

18