Title: Detecting Unseen Jailbreak Sources: A Multi-Source Conformal Detection Perspective

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.09167v1

Published Time: Thu, 08 Oct 2026 00:22:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
# Detecting Unseen Jailbreak Sources: A Multi-Source Conformal Detection Perspective 

Xunlei Qian 1, Yingqian Cui 2, Yuping Lin 2, Jun Wu 2, Yue Xing 11Department of Statistics and Probability, Michigan State University 

> 2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University 

Abstract 

Jailbreak defenses for large language models are usually calibrated on a fixed set of known attack methods. However, new attack methods keep appearing after deployment, and existing detectors are observed to degrade under the new attacks (Piet et al., 2025). This paper studies how to detect, from a stream of attack prompts, that the prompts come from an attack source outside the known ones. We formulate it as a sequential test whose null hypothesis is that the stream comes from one of the known sources. Methodology-wise, we compute a conformal p-value against each known source, and reject the null only when the evidence against every known source is large. Using these source-wise p-values, we build Persist-3 and analyze its stationary false-alarm probability and detection power. The technical contribution of Persist-3 lies in a detection guarantee that uses only a finite window of recent observations. Our theoretical analysis reveals that its detection probability approaches one exponentially fast as the window grows, and thus a short window suffices to detect unseen sources that are well separated from all known sources. Empirically, we validate Persist-3 on top of two recent jailbreak defenses, MTK (Zhang et al., 2026) and Prompt Guard 2 (Chennabasappa et al., 2025), and observe a significant defense enhancement. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Large language models (LLMs) have been deployed in many real applications, such as code generation (Chen, 2021), interactive assistants (Ouyang et al., 2022), and agent systems that call external tools (Yao et al., 2022). Meanwhile, as these models take on more tasks, their safety becomes a practical concern. In particular, LLMs are known to be vulnerable to jailbreak attacks (Zou et al., 2023; Chao et al., 2025), where a crafted prompt makes LLMs produce a harmful response. To defend against these attacks, most existing methods are developed and tested on standard benchmarks that contain a fixed collection of attack methods (Mazeika et al., 2024; Chao et al., 2024). In practice, however, attackers keep designing new methods to bypass deployed defenses. For example, Wang et al. (2025b) evaluate existing jailbreak guardrails and find that their performance varies across attack types, and that generalizing to new attack strategies remains an open deployment challenge. Therefore, a defended system needs to know whether the incoming prompts are generated by one of the known attack methods. To formulate the problem, we call an attack method applied to a given victim model an attack source . Let P1, . . . , P K denote the distributions of the victim-model hidden representations under the 

K known sources, and let Qt denote the distribution generating the prompt at time t. At each time 

t, we test H0 : Qt ∈ { P1, . . . , P K } against H1 : Qt /∈ { P1, . . . , P K }, i.e., instead of determining the 1arXiv:2610.09167v1 [stat.AP] 6 Oct 2026 specific source of the attack, we want to test whether the incoming attack is totally new compared to the known sources. However, existing tools do not directly address this test. First, jailbreak detectors and guardrails judge each individual prompt separately. Thus, they do not track whether the stream of attack prompts, as a whole, has moved away from the known attack methods (Mazeika et al., 2024; Chao et al., 2024). Second, change detectors (Shin et al., 2022; Saha and Ramdas, 2026) usually target any departure from a common pre-change distribution. Thus, a switch between two known sources is also a change to be detected. Third, multi-distribution conformal prediction (MDCP) (Yang and Jin, 2026) calibrates on several sources at once. However, it aims to build prediction sets that remain valid for every known source and their mixtures, and it does not test whether the current prompts come from a new source outside the known ones. These gaps lead to our question: 

From a stream of victim-model representations, how can we tell that no known source explains the current attack prompts, and what determines how quickly this can be detected? 

Technically, a central challenge of the considered test lies in the union structure of H0. To see this, consider two known sources P1 and P2, and a stream from P1. The p-value against P1 is typically large, while the p-value against P2 is small, since the stream is far from P2. Standard p-value combinations, such as Bonferroni, reject as soon as one known source is rejected. Thus, they raise an alarm on this stream, though no unseen source appears. Different from Bonferroni, we reject 

H0 only when every known source is rejected, i.e., when even the best-matching known source fails to explain the stream. We then accumulate this evidence over a recent window or over the whole history. Our contributions are as follows: 

• Formulation. We treat unseen jailbreak source detection as a sequential test whose null hypothesis is that the stream comes from one of the known sources. Compared to existing composite sequential tests (Saha and Ramdas, 2026), a switch between two known sources is not a detection target under our null (Section 3.1). 

• Theory. For our window-based detector, Persist-3, we provide theoretical justifications for its false alarms, memory, and detection power. First, we bound its false alarm probability under a known source (Theorem 4.3). Second, we show that observations before a switch stop affecting its decision after a fixed number of steps (Proposition 4.4). Third, we give a lower bound on its detection power controlled by the smallest evidence margin against the known sources (Theorem 4.6 and Corollary 4.7). 

• Experiments. Beyond the theory, we compare Persist-3, which uses only the most recent W

observations, with SR-DKW, which accumulates evidence over the whole history of the stream, and obtain two findings. First, the two detectors trade off against each other. SR-DKW detects more unseen sources (0.648 versus 0.458), while the decision of Persist-3 depends only on the most recent W + L − 1 observations, so the old source stops affecting it shortly after a switch (Section 5.1). Second, adding either detector on top of MTK (Zhang et al., 2026) or Prompt Guard 2 (Chennabasappa et al., 2025) raises 7.0 to 10.0 percentage points more of the originally successful jailbreak attacks, i.e., escalates them before a harmful response is returned (Section 5.3). 

# 2 Related Work 

Our work connects conformal inference and jailbreak defense. On the conformal side, split conformal prediction gives distribution-free validity under exchangeability (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos 2and Bates, 2023). Multi-source methods retain this validity when calibration data come from several distributions (Liu et al., 2024b; Wong et al., 2025; Yang and Jin, 2026). In addition, shift-adaptive and online conformal methods update thresholds when the test distribution changes (Tibshirani et al., 2019; Gibbs and Candes, 2021; Zaffran et al., 2022). These methods aim at valid prediction sets under a given shift model. Different from them, we use source-wise conformal p-values to test whether the stream is still generated by any calibrated source. On the jailbreak side, attack strategies evolve over time, and detectors degrade under such shifts (Piet et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b). Meanwhile, recent studies show that hidden representations separate harmful and benign prompts (Lin et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2025), which motivates our use of victim-model representations as the detection signal. Appendix C gives a detailed discussion. 

# 3 Method 

This section introduces the proposed detector. We first formulate the problem (Section 3.1), then measure how atypical each incoming prompt is under each known source through a conformal p-value (Section 3.2). Finally we combine this evidence across sources and over time into a detection rule (Sections 3.3 to 3.5), and describe how an alarm is used on top of an existing guardrail (Section 3.6). Figure 1 in Appendix D gives an overview of the pipeline. 

3.1 Problem formulation 

Data. For each incoming prompt, we extract the hidden representation X ∈ X of the victim model before any response is returned. Let Y ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether the jailbreak succeeds. Let 

P1, . . . , P K denote the distributions of X under the K known attack sources, i.e., the sources whose data are available for calibration. 

Stream model and hypotheses. Following the sequential change-detection literature (Shin et al., 2022), we model the stream as piecewise i.i.d. That is, the Xt are independent with 

Xt ∼ Qt, and Qt stays constant between change points ν1 < ν 2 < · · · , at which the attacker switches source. We call the stretch between two change points a segment . At each time t, we test H0 : Qt ∈ { P1, . . . , P K } against H1 : Qt /∈ { P1, . . . , P K }. Since the change points are unknown to the detector, it cannot pool all observations of the current segment. Thus, it uses only recent observations (Section 3.3). We call a switch between two known sources a known-to-known (KK) switch, and a switch into an unseen source a known-to-unknown (KU) switch. A KK switch changes the distribution. However, since it stays within H0, it is not a detection target. Only a KU switch is a detection target. 

Decisions after a switch. Right after a switch, the recent window still contains prompts from the old source. Thus, our decisions are made after enough prompts from the new source have arrived. For Persist-3, this takes B = W + L − 1 new observations, where the window length W

and the persistence length L are defined in Sections 3.3 and 3.4. After these B observations, the old source no longer affects the decision ( finite forgetting , Section 3.4). 

Online information. The online detector uses only Xt. Since the outcome Yt is unavailable when a prompt arrives, the detector does not access it. Outcome labels are used only offline. Specifically, we use them to evaluate interventions in Section 5.3. In addition, under the additional assumptions of Corollary B.6, we use them for optional enrollment of a detected source (Section 3.6). 33.2 Source-wise conformal p-values 

This subsection converts each prompt into one p-value per known source. To decide whether a prompt is typical under source k, we first need a score measuring how far it is from that source. We use a Mahalanobis distance in a low-dimensional space. Specifically, we fit a shared PCA map Π on the pooled training representations of all known sources, with output dimension at most 32. This dimension is fixed in advance, and Appendix H.4 shows that detection levels off at this dimension, while the KK alarm rate is insensitive to it. Then, for each source k, we fit a mean bμk and a Ledoit-Wolf covariance bΣk in the projected space. Writing z = Π( x), the nonconformity score is 

Sk(x) = ( z − bμk)⊤ bΣ+ 

> k

(z − bμk), (1) where + denotes the Moore-Penrose inverse when needed. A larger Sk(x) means that x is farther from source k.We then convert this score into a p-value using held-out calibration data. Let Rk,i = Sk(Xcal  

> k,i

), 

i = 1 , . . . , n k, be the calibration scores of source k. For a new representation x, define 

pk(x) = 1 + Pnk 

> i=1

I{Rk,i ≥ Sk(x)}

nk + 1 . (2) Intuitively, pk(x) is essentially the fraction of calibration prompts from source k that are at least as far from source k as x. Thus, a small pk(x) is evidence against source k. To add this evidence over time, we transform it into Zk(x) = − log pk(x), which is large when x is atypical under source k.

3.3 Window-based evidence across known sources 

This subsection combines the source-wise evidence over a recent window and then across the known sources. Since a single small p-value can occur by chance even when the prompt comes from source 

k, we average the evidence over the most recent W observations. In our jailbreak evaluation, we use 

W = 10. With mt = min {W, t }, define, for each known source k,

Ck,t = 1

mttX 

> r=max {1,t −W+1 }

− log pk(Xr). (3) Since H0 holds as long as at least one known source explains the stream, we then take the minimum over the K known sources: 

Cfam  

> t

= min  

> k∈[K]

Ck,t . (4) In other words, Cfam  

> t

(“fam” for the family of known sources) is the evidence against the known source that best explains the recent observations. Thus, it is small whenever at least one known source explains them well. Conversely, Cfam  

> t

≥ τ holds if and only if Ck,t ≥ τ for every k. Therefore, exceeding the threshold τ means that every known source is rejected. 

Order of aggregation. The order of the two aggregations in (3) and (4) matters. Since the minimum over sources is taken after the average over time, the same known source must explain the whole window. Thus, a window that mixes prompts from two known sources can be inconsistent with every single known source, even when each prompt in it is compatible with one of them. This is why a window that contains a switch between two known sources can raise an alarm (Remark 4.5). Once all observations used by the decision come from the new known source, the false-alarm bound of Theorem 4.3 applies again, provided that its threshold condition τ > μ 0,j holds. 4A cumulative comparator. For comparison, we also consider SR-DKW, a detector that accumulates evidence over the whole history of the stream. It applies a Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz (DKW) correction to the same source-wise p-values, and then feeds them into a Shiryaev–Roberts recursion (Appendix F). Since SR-DKW combines the sources at each step before accumulating over time, it does not require a single known source to explain a whole window. Our theoretical analysis focuses on Persist-3. Since its window is finite, we can characterize exactly when earlier observations stop affecting the current decision. The two detectors are compared empirically in Section 5. 

3.4 Persistent confirmation 

This subsection adds a persistence rule that removes isolated threshold crossings. Since a single crossing of the threshold can still occur by chance, the detector raises an alarm only when Cfam 

> t

stays above τ for L consecutive steps. Let 

At(τ ) = I{Cfam  

> t

≥ τ }.

For a persistence length L and t ≥ L, define 

Dt = I{At(τ ) = At−1(τ ) = · · · = At−L+1 (τ ) = 1 } , (5) and set Dt = 0 for t < L . Equivalently, Dt = I{min s=t−L+1 ,...,t Cfam  

> s

≥ τ }. The detection time is 

Talarm = inf {t ≥ L : Dt = 1 }, with inf ∅ = ∞. In the analysis, we keep computing Dt after the first alarm. This allows us to describe its behavior at any fixed time. In practice, Algorithm 1 stops at 

Talarm and escalates the stream, and later values of Dt do not undo this escalation. 

Choice of L. For our jailbreak evaluation, we use W = 10 and L = 3. That is, the detector averages the evidence against each known source over the last 10 observations, takes the minimum over the K known sources, and raises an alarm only when this minimum stays above τ for three consecutive steps. This is where the name Persist-3 comes from. We fix L = 3 in advance by a pilot on known sources only. Specifically, L = 3 is the smallest L such that runs of at least L consecutive threshold crossings are rare on known-source streams. Appendix H.3 reports L ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4} and shows a trade-off: a larger L gives a higher detection rate but a longer delay. We require persistence for the following reason. Streams from a known source tend to produce isolated threshold crossings, whereas streams from an unseen source tend to produce consecutive ones. Thus, persistence removes most chance crossings while keeping sustained evidence. Appendix D relates this rule to the 

M -out-of-N rule in radar detection (Schwartz, 1956) and to runs rules for Shewhart charts (Champ and Woodall, 1987). 

Finite forgetting. The decision Dt has a finite memory. Since Dt uses L consecutive windows of length W , it depends only on the most recent B = W + L − 1 observations. Thus, after a switch, observations from the old source stop affecting the decision once B new observations have arrived. We call this property finite forgetting and state it formally in Proposition 4.4. For W = 10 and 

L = 3, this takes B = 12 observations. Cumulative detectors such as SR-DKW do not have this property, since their internal state may keep reflecting pre-switch evidence. 

3.5 Threshold calibration using known sources only 

This subsection selects the threshold τ using validation streams from known sources only. Specifically, no data or labels from the held-out unseen source are used. Let [FPR val (τ ) denote the fraction of validation streams from a single known source that raise an alarm. Let dKK val (τ ) denote the fraction of validation streams with a KK switch that raise an alarm. We choose 

bτ = min 

n

τ ∈ T : [FPR val (τ ) ≤ αstat , dKK val (τ ) ≤ αKK 

o

,

5where T is a prespecified threshold grid and ( αstat , α KK ) are fixed before KU evaluation. That is, bτ

is the smallest threshold whose alarm rates on known-source validation streams stay within the two caps. The caps, the grid, and the selected thresholds of each protocol are listed in Appendix D. When we repeat the evaluation on a second data split (Appendix A), the selection rule is kept fixed, and only bτ is recalibrated. The detector architecture, W , L, the source score, and the aggregation rule are not retuned. Finally, each observation requires one score and one p-value per known source. In addition, Persist-3 stores only the most recent W values per source. 

3.6 Layered intervention 

This subsection describes how an alarm is used to intervene on top of an existing guardrail. Let 

Gt ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether an unchanged prompt-level guardrail intervenes on prompt t. Let 

M denote a source monitor, i.e., Persist-3 or SR-DKW, and let T (M )act be the time from which M

escalates every incoming prompt, e.g., by sending it to a stricter review. Write A(M ) 

> t

= I{t ≥ T (M )act }.The combined action is I(G+M ) 

> t

= Gt ∨ A(M ) 

> t

. In other words, the guardrail keeps screening each prompt, and the monitor only decides the time from which every prompt in the stream is escalated. Escalation activates at the alarm itself, T (M )act = Talarm of Section 3.4, and the alarmed prompt is escalated (Appendix L). An escalation is not undone when old observations leave the window. The reason is that finite forgetting (Proposition 4.4) concerns the statistic Dt, whereas an escalation stays on once it is activated. 

# 4 Theoretical Results 

This section provides theoretical guarantees for Persist-3. Specifically, we study the validity of the source-wise p-values (Section 4.1), false alarm control under a known source (Section 4.2), finite forgetting after a KK switch (Section 4.3), and detection power (Section 4.4). Proofs are in Appendix G. Further results, including why persistence helps after calibration and a score-space identifiability limit, are in Appendix B. 

Assumption 4.1 (Frozen offline fit and i.i.d. segments) . Let T contain all training data and fitting randomness, so that the PCA map and all scores Sk are fixed given T . For each k, conditional on 

T , the nk ≥ 1 calibration observations are i.i.d. from Pk, with nk fixed before they are inspected. Independence across source calibration sets is not required. Let O contain T , all calibration and validation data, and the selected W, L ≥ 1 and τ , all frozen before the final stream and independent of it. For deterministic change points 1 = ν0 < ν 1 < · · · ,whose last endpoint may be ∞, and fixed distributions Qr, each segment {Xt : νr ≤ t < ν r+1 } is i.i.d. from Qr conditional on O, and a known segment has Qr = Pj for some j.

Assumption 4.1 has two parts. The first part says that, once the offline fit is frozen, the calibration observations of each source behave like fresh draws from that source. Thus, it gives the exchangeability used by Proposition 4.2. The second part says that the stream is a sequence of i.i.d. segments, and that all offline objects are chosen without looking at it. Thus, Zk(Xt) is independent and bounded within a segment, which is required by the weighted Hoeffding arguments in Theorems 4.3 and 4.6. Both parts follow standard practice, e.g., piecewise i.i.d. segments in sequential change detection (Shin et al., 2022), and split-conformal validity under a frozen score (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023). Appendix H.7 studies dwell times shorter than 

B = W + L − 1. 64.1 Source-wise conformal validity 

Proposition 4.2 (Source-wise split-conformal validity) . Under Assumption 4.1, for a fresh X ∼ Pk

independent of calibration given T ,

P{pk(X) ≤ u | T } ≤ u, u ∈ [0 , 1] .

Here, the probability is taken over both the calibration data and the new prompt X. The result also holds when the calibration scores and the score of X are exchangeable, which is weaker than i.i.d. If two scores are equal with probability zero, i.e., there are no ties, then pk(X) is exactly uniform on 

{1/(nk + 1) , . . . , 1} conditional on T .

The proof of Proposition 4.2 is in Appendix G. In short, it uses the standard rank argument of split conformal prediction. Note that Proposition 4.2 concerns a single observation. Since the same calibration sample is reused over time, it does not imply that the p-values along the stream are conditionally i.i.d. uniform. In addition, it does not give an anytime guarantee. A DKW argument further bounds the tail of pk conditional on the calibration data (Lemma 1, Appendix B). We use this bound only in the analysis, while the detector uses the raw p-values. 

4.2 False alarm control under a known source 

This subsection bounds the false alarm probability of Persist-3 under a known source. To explain the result, we first introduce some notation. Throughout this subsection, we condition on O. Write 

bk = log( nk + 1), so 0 ≤ Zk(X) ≤ bk. Let μ0,j = EPj [Zj (X) | O ] be the mean evidence against a known source Pj under Pj itself. A Persist-L decision uses L overlapping windows of length W ,which cover B = W + L − 1 observations. Let ah be the number of windows containing the hth of these observations, and let AW,L = PBh=1 a2

> h

. When W ≥ L,

AW,L = 2 

> L−1

X

> r=1

r2 + ( W − L + 1) L2. (6) 

Theorem 4.3 (Persistence-aware stationary false-alarm bound) . Under Assumption 4.1, let t ≥ B

be a deterministic time such that Xt−B+1 , . . . , X t lie in one segment from Pj . All L windows then have length W . If τ > μ 0,j , then 

PPj {Dt = 1 | O} ≤ exp 

(

− 2( LW )2(τ − μ0,j )2

b2 

> j

AW,L 

)

. (7) The proof of Theorem 4.3 is in Appendix G. In short, a Persist-L alarm forces all L window averages against the true source Pj above τ . Their sum is a weighted sum of B independent bounded terms with weights ah. Then, the weighted Hoeffding inequality gives (7). Theorem 4.3 illustrates two observations. First, the bound decays exponentially in the gap 

τ − μ0,j . Thus, a threshold above the typical evidence under a known source gives rare false alarms. Second, the bound concerns the persistence event itself, not only the larger event {Cfam  

> t

≥ τ }. Thus, it accounts for the dependence among the overlapping windows. For example, for W = 10 and 

L = 3, A10 ,3 = 82, giving an effective sample size ( LW )2/A W,L ≈ 10 .98 instead of LW = 30. In addition, Corollary B.2 extends the bound to a finite horizon, including the first steps when the windows are not yet full, and Corollary B.1 gives a DKW refinement. Finally, since τ is selected from validation data, these bounds do not by themselves guarantee a prespecified population-level alarm rate for the selected threshold. 74.3 Known-to-known switching and finite forgetting 

Proposition 4.4 (Finite forgetting within a known-source segment) . Suppose a KK switch occurs immediately before Xν , and the new segment follows Pj until the next change point νnext . Let 

B = W + L − 1. At every deterministic time ν + B − 1 ≤ t < ν next , the continued decision Dt

depends only on observations from Pj , so Theorem 4.3 applies if τ > μ 0,j .

The proof of Proposition 4.4 is in Appendix G. In other words, the old source stops affecting the decision after B observations from the new source, which we call finite forgetting . For W = 10 and 

L = 3, this takes B = 12 observations. If the attacker switches again before B new observations arrive, no fully post-switch decision exists, and Proposition 4.4 does not apply. Appendix H.7 studies this case. 

Remark 4.5 (Transient KK alarms) . Finite forgetting does not imply zero alarm probability right after a KK switch. During the first B − 1 decisions after a switch from Pi to Pj , a window contains prompts from both sources. The prompts from Pj raise the average evidence against Pi, and the prompts from Pi raise the average evidence against Pj . Thus, neither source may explain the whole window, and an alarm can occur. Finite forgetting also does not undo an earlier alarm, and segments shorter than B may admit no decision based on a single source. 

Remark 4.5 is consistent with the experiments, where the KK alarm rate is small but nonzero. 

4.4 Detection power and nearest-source separation 

This subsection lower bounds the detection power of Persist-3 under an unseen source. We again condition on O. For a candidate unseen source Q, let μk(Q) = EQ[− log pk(X) | O ] be the mean evidence against known source k under Q. Let ∆ k(Q) = μk(Q) − τ be its margin above the threshold. 

Theorem 4.6 (Detection power under separation from every known source) . Under Assumption 4.1, suppose a segment [ν, ν next ) follows Q and ∆k(Q) > 0 for every known source k. At any deterministic 

t satisfying ν + B − 1 ≤ t < ν next , where B = W + L − 1,

PQ{Dt = 1 | O} ≥ 1 − L

> K

X

> k=1

exp 



− 2W ∆2

> k

(Q)

b2

> k



. (8) The proof of Theorem 4.6 is in Appendix G. In short, each window average against source k

concentrates around τ + ∆ k(Q) by Hoeffding’s inequality. Then, two union bounds, over the K

sources and over the L persistence times, give (8). Theorem 4.6 has two implications. First, it gives a sufficient condition for detection. If the mean evidence under Q exceeds τ against every known source, the detection probability approaches one as W grows. Second, it shows which source dominates the bound. Since each term of the bound is exponential in W ∆2

> k

(Q)/b 2

> k

, the bound is dominated by the smallest normalized margin ∆ k(Q)/b k.That is, the margin is measured against the range bk = log( nk + 1) of the evidence for that source. Note that an unseen source, i.e., Q / ∈ { P1, . . . , P K }, does not necessarily satisfy this condition. In addition, the bound is nontrivial only when the subtracted sum is below one. Finally, when the source changes again before B observations arrive, the window mixes several segments, and (8) need not apply. Appendix H.7 shows that detection then degrades, most strongly when unseen segments are interrupted by known ones, but it does not vanish. The second implication leads to the following corollary. 8Corollary 4.7 (Nearest-source separation) . Let ∆∗(Q) = min k∈[K] ∆k(Q), which we call the 

nearest-source separation of Q, and bmax = max k∈[K] bk. Under the segment and time conditions of Theorem 4.6, if ∆∗(Q) > 0, then 

PQ{Dt = 1 | O} ≥ 1 − LK exp 



− 2W ∆2

> ∗

(Q)

b2max 



. (9) Corollary 4.7 states the second implication in terms of the raw margins. Specifically, it bounds every bk by bmax . Thus, the power bound is controlled by the smallest source-wise evidence margin, not by the average margin over known sources. Rearranging (9), the bound reaches 1 − η once 

W ≥ b2max 

2∆ 2

> ∗

(Q) log LK η ,

which is the scale on which the window has to grow as the margin shrinks. Appendix B further gives a delay bound (Corollary B.5) and an identifiability limit (Proposi-tion B.4). 

# 5 Experiments 

In this section, we empirically verify the analysis in Sections 3 and 4. Our experiments aim to justify (1) the trade-off between window-based and cumulative detection under the same calibration, including the bounded memory of Persist-3 (Section 5.1); (2) the role of nearest-source separation (Corollary 4.7, Section 5.2); and (3) the incremental protection and cost of adding the detectors to existing guardrails (Section 5.3). 

Models, attacks, and protocol. We use AdvBench/Harmful Behaviors (Zou et al., 2023) and HarmBench (Mazeika et al., 2024) with four victim models: Llama2-7B-chat, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Gemma-2-9B-it, and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. The eleven attack sources range from optimization-based suffixes (Zou et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024) to automated black-box search (Chao et al., 2025; Mehrotra et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025) and human-written prompts (Shen et al., 2024). In each configuration, one source is held out as the unseen source, and the others are known. Sections 5.1 and 5.2 use 330 leave-one-source-out configurations over seeds {0, 7, 11 , 23 , 42 } with a 50/25/25 training, calibration, and test split (the original split ). Section 5.3 uses a separate 50-configuration replay (Appendix L). We compare Persist-3 with SR-DKW and SR-RAW, which apply the Shiryaev– Roberts recursion to DKW-adjusted and raw source-wise p-values, respectively (Appendix J). Each SR method uses either the full history or a window of W = 10. 

Calibration on known sources only. The main comparison uses a long-horizon protocol : each stream has horizon H = 1000, and KK and KU streams switch at ν = 501. For each method, the threshold is the most aggressive one that keeps the stationary FPR ≤ 0.01 and the KK alarm rate 

≤ 0.05 on known-source validation streams. All settings are frozen before KU evaluation, and all methods are tested on the same streams. Section 5.2 and the memory checks in Appendix I.3 use a 

short-horizon protocol with 40 observations per segment, and the threshold of Persist-3 is selected as in Section 3.5. Stress tests at other budgets are in Appendix H. 9Table 1: Main comparison ( H = 1000, ν = 501). Thresholds are selected on known-source validation streams (stationary FPR ≤ 0.01, KK alarm rate ≤ 0.05). Stationary FPR is reported as counts.                              

> Method Stationary FPR ↓KK alarm rate ↓KU detection rate ↑
> Persist-3 0/1835 0.006 [0 .004 ,0.007] 0.458 [0 .335 ,0.627] SR-DKW full 0/1835 0.003 [0 .002 ,0.005] 0.648 [0 .490 ,0.793] SR-RAW full 8/1835 0/10640 0.720 SR-DKW W= 10 0/1835 0.003 0.377 SR-RAW W= 10 4/1835 0.005 0.545

Metrics. We define that a stationary stream comes from a single known source without any switch. We use the following three metrics for evaluation: (1) The stationary false positive rate (FPR) is the fraction of stationary streams with any alarm. (2) The KK alarm rate is the fraction of KK streams with any alarm. (3) The KU detection rate is the fraction of KU streams whose first alarm occurs after the switch, i.e., in [ ν, H ]. A stream with an alarm before the switch is not restarted, so it counts as a miss. Since the first two metrics count false alarms, a lower stationary FPR and a lower KK alarm rate are better. In contrast, a higher KU detection rate is better. Confidence intervals come from a bootstrap that resamples held-out sources. 

5.1 Window-based versus cumulative detection 

This subsection shows that accumulating evidence over the whole history improves detection, while the window of Persist-3 bounds its memory. Table 1 gives three observations. First, full-history SR-DKW detects more unseen sources than Persist-3 under the same validation caps (0 .648 vs. 0 .458), with a lower KK alarm rate (0 .003 vs. 0 .006). In addition, both methods have a stationary FPR of 0 /1835. SR-RAW has an even higher KU detection rate (0 .720). However, its stationary FPR is 8 /1835. Second, within each SR family, truncating the recursion to W = 10 reduces KU detection (SR-DKW: 0 .648 → 0.377; SR-RAW: 0 .720 → 0.545). This is more direct evidence that accumulation helps, since weak but persistent evidence reaches the threshold only after it is accumulated. Third, Persist-3 has bounded memory, while full-history SR does not. Since each decision of Persist-3 uses only the most recent B = W + L − 1 = 12 observations, the observations from the old source stop affecting its decision after B post-switch steps (Proposition 4.4). In contrast, full-history SR keeps the pre-switch evidence in its state (Remark J.1). Appendix I.3 verifies this bounded memory empirically. 

5.2 Nearest-source separation and detectability 

This subsection shows that the nearest-source separation predicts which unseen sources are hard to detect. Corollary 4.7 predicts that an unseen source is harder to detect when it is close to some known source. After freezing the detector, we estimate the separation of each held-out source by 

b∆∗(Q) = min k∈[K]{bμk(Q) − τ }, where bμk(Q) is the average of − log pk over the test prompts from Q.Across the eleven held-out attack methods, b∆∗ is strongly associated with KU detection (Pearson 

r = 0 .98 [0.94, 1.00]; Spearman ρ = 0 .95 [0.70, 1.00]). The robustness resplit gives Pearson r = 0 .981 [0.947, 0.995]. Thus, attack methods with a small margin against at least one known source are hard to detect, which is consistent with Corollary 4.7. 

5.3 Detecting new attack sources after guardrail failure 

This subsection shows that source detection adds protection on top of existing jailbreak defenses. 10 Table 2: Adding a source monitor to an unchanged guardrail (50 configurations, offline replay). Block rate: fraction of originally successful attacks in KU streams (including the known-source prefix) that are intercepted, with a 95% bootstrap interval for its increment. Extra KU intervention: fraction of KU-stream prompts escalated by the monitor only. KK intervention: fraction of KK-stream prompts intervened on. Yield: additional interceptions per 100 extra KU interventions. Rates are averaged over configurations. Interception assumes that escalation prevents the harmful response. Details are in Appendix L.                                            

> System Block rate (%) ↑Extra KU intervention (%) KK intervention (%) ↓Yield ↑
> MTK alone 39.7 0.0 62.2 –+ Persist-3 47.1 (+7 .4 [3 .3,11 .8]) 8.0 63.4 (+1 .1) 7.28 + SR-DKW 49.7 (+10 .0 [4 .1,16 .1]) 10.9 62.7 (+0 .4) 7.66 PG2 alone 30.4 0.0 31.0 –+ Persist-3 37.4 (+7 .0 [2 .6,12 .6]) 12.1 32.7 (+1 .7) 5.32 + SR-DKW 40.0 (+9 .6 [2 .8,18 .8]) 16.1 31.7 (+0 .7) 5.83

Setup. We treat known and unknown sources differently. 

• Known sources : The system developer already knows how to defend against known sources. Thus, on streams with only known sources, we only report how often prompts are escalated. 

• Unknown source : The considered methods are used to defend against the new source. Thus, we measure how many originally successful attacks in KU streams are blocked. We compare each unchanged guardrail G, MTK (Zhang et al., 2026) or Prompt Guard 2 (PG2) (Chennabasappa et al., 2025), with G+Persist-3 and G+SR-DKW under the combined action 

I(G+M ) 

> t

= Gt ∨ A(M ) 

> t

of Section 3.6. The evaluation is an offline replay of cached streams from 50 AdvBench configurations with Llama-2-7B-chat, which contain 1,729 originally successful attack occurrences. 

Results. Table 2 shows three observations. First, adding either monitor increases the block rate for both guardrails. Specifically, Persist-3 increases the block rate by 7.4 and 7.0 percentage points for MTK and PG2, and SR-DKW increases it by 10.0 and 9.6 percentage points. All four bootstrap intervals are above zero. Second, the monitors intervene on more KU prompts. Specifically, the extra KU intervention is 8.0 to 16.1 percentage points, and the yield is 5.32 to 7.66. However, the KK intervention increases by only 0.4 to 1.7 percentage points. Third, SR-DKW blocks more attacks than Persist-3, which is consistent with Section 5.1. Specifically, SR-DKW detects more KU streams (0 .851 vs. 0 .640), and its block rate is 2.6 percentage points higher for both guardrails. 

# 6 Conclusion 

This paper studies how to detect unseen jailbreak sources from a stream of attack prompts. We formulate the problem as a test of whether the stream comes from one of the known attack sources, and thus a switch among known sources stays within the null. For Persist-3, a window-based detector built on source-wise conformal p-values, we show that pre-switch observations stop affecting the decision after W + L − 1 steps (finite forgetting). In addition, its detection power is controlled by the smallest evidence margin against the known sources (nearest-source separation). Empirically, experiments on jailbreak benchmarks verify these results. As a future direction, it is interesting to analyze the asymptotic behavior of the detector as more online data arrive. 11 References 

Angelopoulos, A. N., Barber, R. F., and Bates, S. (2024). Online conformal prediction with decaying step sizes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01139 .Angelopoulos, A. N. and Bates, S. (2023). Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 16(4):494–591. Champ, C. W. and Woodall, W. H. (1987). Exact results for Shewhart control charts with supplementary runs rules. Technometrics , 29(4):393–399. Chao, P., Debenedetti, E., Robey, A., Andriushchenko, M., Croce, F., Sehwag, V., Dobriban, E., Flammarion, N., Pappas, G. J., Tramer, F., et al. (2024). Jailbreakbench: An open robustness benchmark for jailbreaking large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:55005–55029. Chao, P., Robey, A., Dobriban, E., Hassani, H., Pappas, G. J., and Wong, E. (2025). Jailbreaking black box large language models in twenty queries. In 2025 IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML) , pages 23–42. IEEE. Chen, M. (2021). Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Chennabasappa, S., Nikolaidis, C., Song, D., Molnar, D., Ding, S., Wan, S., Whitman, S., Deason, L., Doucette, N., Montilla, A., et al. (2025). Llamafirewall: An open source guardrail system for building secure ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03574 .Fayyazi, A., Kamal, M., and Pedram, M. (2025). Facter: Fairness-aware conformal threshold-ing and prompt engineering for enabling fair llm-based recommender systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02966 .Fu, S., Su, D., Chen, X., Sun, F., Shen, H., and Cheng, X. (2026). Steering away from refusal: A black-box jailbreak method based on first-token distribution. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 25969–25979. Gao, L., Geng, J., Zhang, X., Nakov, P., and Chen, X. (2025). Shaping the safety boundaries: Understanding and defending against jailbreaks in large language models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 25378–25398. Gibbs, I. and Candes, E. (2021). Adaptive conformal inference under distribution shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:1660–1672. He, Z., Wang, Z., Chu, Z., Xu, H., Zhang, W., Wang, Q., and Zheng, R. (2024). Jailbreaklens: Interpreting jailbreak mechanism in the lens of representation and circuit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11114 .Hu, K., Aggarwal, A., Khodabandeh, M., Zhang, D., Hsin, E., Chen, L., Jain, A., Fredrikson, M., and Bharadwaj, A. (2026). Jailbreak-zero: A path to pareto optimal red teaming for large language models. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 46720–46746. 12 Hu, K., Yu, W., Li, Y., Yao, T., Li, X., Liu, W., Yu, L., Shen, Z., Chen, K., and Fredrikson, M. (2024). Efficient llm jailbreak via adaptive dense-to-sparse constrained optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:23224–23245. Lei, J., G’Sell, M., Rinaldo, A., Tibshirani, R. J., and Wasserman, L. (2018). Distribution-free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(523):1094– 1111. Lin, Y., He, P., Xu, H., Xing, Y., Yamada, M., Liu, H., and Tang, J. (2024). Towards understanding jailbreak attacks in llms: A representation space analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10794 .Liu, X., Li, P., Suh, G. E., Vorobeychik, Y., Mao, Z., Jha, S., McDaniel, P., Sun, H., Li, B., and Xiao, C. (2025). Autodan-turbo: A lifelong agent for strategy self-exploration to jailbreak llms. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 10313–10360. Liu, X., Xu, N., Chen, M., and Xiao, C. (2023). Autodan: Generating stealthy jailbreak prompts on aligned large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04451 .Liu, Y., He, X., Xiong, M., Fu, J., Deng, S., Ma, Y., Zhang, J., and Hooi, B. (2024a). Flipattack: Jailbreak llms via flipping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02832 .Liu, Y., Levis, A. W., Normand, S.-L., and Han, L. (2024b). Multi-source conformal inference under distribution shift. Proceedings of machine learning research , 235:31344. Mazeika, M., Phan, L., Yin, X., Zou, A., Wang, Z., Mu, N., Sakhaee, E., Li, N., Basart, S., Li, B., et al. (2024). Harmbench: A standardized evaluation framework for automated red teaming and robust refusal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04249 .Mehrotra, A., Zampetakis, M., Kassianik, P., Nelson, B., Anderson, H., Singer, Y., and Karbasi, A. (2024). Tree of attacks: Jailbreaking black-box llms automatically. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:61065–61105. Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Piet, J., Huang, X., Jacob, D., Chow, A., Alrashed, M., Zhao, G., Hu, Z., Sitawarin, C., Alomair, B., and Wagner, D. (2025). Jailbreaksovertime: Detecting jailbreak attacks under distribution shift. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security , pages 230–241. Saha, A. and Ramdas, A. (2026). Non-partitioned e-detectors for nonparametric sequential change detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.28322 .Schwartz, M. (1956). A coincidence procedure for signal detection. IRE Transactions on Information Theory , 2(4):135–139. Shafer, G. and Vovk, V. (2008). A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(3). Shen, X., Chen, Z., Backes, M., Shen, Y., and Zhang, Y. (2024). ” do anything now”: Characterizing and evaluating in-the-wild jailbreak prompts on large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 1671–1685. 13 Shin, J., Ramdas, A., and Rinaldo, A. (2022). E-detectors: A nonparametric framework for sequential change detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03532 .Spjuth, O., Br¨ annstr¨ om, R. C., Carlsson, L., and Gauraha, N. (2019). Combining prediction intervals on multi-source non-disclosed regression datasets. In Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction and Applications , pages 53–65. PMLR. Takemoto, K. (2024). All in how you ask for it: Simple black-box method for jailbreak attacks. 

Applied Sciences , 14(9):3558. Tibshirani, R. J., Foygel Barber, R., Candes, E., and Ramdas, A. (2019). Conformal prediction under covariate shift. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Vovk, V., Gammerman, A., and Shafer, G. (2005). Algorithmic learning in a random world . Springer. Wang, N.-S., Yaldiz, D. N., Bakman, Y. F., and Karimireddy, S. P. (2025a). Conformal prediction adaptive to unknown subpopulation shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05583 .Wang, X., Ji, Z., Wang, W., Li, Z., Wu, D., and Wang, S. (2025b). Sok: Evaluating jailbreak guardrails for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10597 .Wong, G., Prinster, D., Saria, S., Chellappa, R., and Liu, A. (2025). Improving coverage in combined prediction sets with weighted p-values. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11785 .Yang, Y. and Jin, Y. (2026). Multi-distribution robust conformal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.02998 .Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., and Cao, Y. (2022). React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Zaffran, M., F´ eron, O., Goude, Y., Josse, J., and Dieuleveut, A. (2022). Adaptive conformal predictions for time series. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 25834–25866. PMLR. Zhang, H., Zhao, Y., Liu, S., Zhou, Z., Ye, Z., Wan, W., Li, M., Hu, S., Zhang, Y., Liu, Y., et al. (2026). Defending jailbreak attacks on large language models via manifold trajectory kinetics. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07335 .Zheng, C., Yin, F., Zhou, H., Meng, F., Zhou, J., Chang, K.-W., Huang, M., and Peng, N. (2024). On prompt-driven safeguarding for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18018 .Zou, A., Wang, Z., Carlini, N., Nasr, M., Kolter, J. Z., and Fredrikson, M. (2023). Universal and transferable adversarial attacks on aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043 .14 Supplementary Materials A Robustness and Diagnostics Deferred from the Main Text 

A.1 Robustness resplit 

We use two data splits throughout and never pool them. The original split is a 50/25/25 partition over seeds {0, 7, 11 , 23 , 42 }, giving 330 complete configurations, with the frozen Persist-3 threshold 

bτ = 2 .386. The robustness resplit is a second 50/25/25 partition of the same cached example pool over seeds {101 , 103 , 107 , 109 , 113 }, with the threshold recalibrated by the same known-only rule, 

bτ = 2 .374. The robustness resplit is a split-robustness check on the same cached embedding pool. It is not an independent dataset, not a preregistered confirmatory study, and not a second population of jailbreaks. Its protocol was fixed before KU results were computed, and the detector was not retuned. It gives 10/2425 stationary alarms (FPR 0 .0041), a KK alarm rate of 0 .044, and KU detection 0 .414 [0 .282 , 0.589] (Table 8). 

A.2 Summary of theory–experiment diagnostics 

Appendix I reports diagnostics computed after the detector is frozen; they are not used for tuning. They show that (i) the estimated nearest-source separation is strongly associated with KU detection, as predicted by Corollary 4.7; (ii) two streams that differ only before a switch produce identical Persist-3 decisions after B = 12 steps, and all first post-switch KK alarms occur within d ≤ 11 steps, as predicted by Proposition 4.4 (Appendix I.3); and (iii) delay conditional on detection is biased by selection, so we report it only descriptively. 

# B Additional Theoretical Results 

This section collects results referred to in the main text. Proofs are in Appendix G. 

Lemma 1 (Calibration-conditional tail bound) . Under Assumption 4.1, fix T and β ∈ (0 , 1) . Let 

Fk(s) = PPk {Sk(X) ≤ s | T } and let bFk be the empirical CDF of the calibration scores. Define 

εk(β) = 

s

log(2 K/β )2nk

, G =

> K

\

> k=1



sup 

> s

| bFk(s) − Fk(s)| ≤ εk(β)



.

Then P(G | T ) ≥ 1 − β. For every offline realization O in G and a fresh X ∼ Pk independent of O,

PPk {pk(X) ≤ u | O} ≤ min {1, u + εk(β)}, u ∈ [0 , 1] .

Consequently, simultaneously for all k,

EPk [− log pk(X) | O ] ≤ ¯μk := 

Z bk

> 0

min {1, e −z + εk(β)} dz, b k = log( nk + 1) .

The probability 1 − β averages over calibration, conditional on training; it is not a coverage guarantee conditional on calibration-dependent selection events. 

Corollary B.1 (High-probability DKW version) . On G in Lemma 1, μ0,j ≤ ¯μj . Under the full-window conditions of Theorem 4.3, whenever τ > ¯μj , its bound holds with μ0,j replaced by ¯μj . The joint calibration event has probability at least 1 − β conditional on T . This statement does not assert that an empirically selected τ satisfies τ > ¯μj .

15 Corollary B.2 (Finite-horizon stationary control including startup) . Under Assumption 4.1, suppose X1, . . . , X H are i.i.d. from Pj , where H ≥ L is deterministic. For L ≤ t ≤ H, let 

vt,r =

> t

X

> s=t−L+1

I{max(1 , s − W + 1) ≤ r ≤ s}

ms

, r = 1 , . . . , t, V t =

> t

X

> r=1

v2

> t,r

.

If τ > μ 0,j , define 

ρj,t = exp 

(

− 2L2(τ − μ0,j )2

b2 

> j

Vt

)

;

otherwise set ρj,t = 1 . Then 

PPj {Talarm ≤ H | O} ≤ min 

(

1,

> H

X

> t=L

ρj,t 

)

.

For t ≥ B, Vt = AW,L /W 2, recovering the full-window bound. On G, μ0,j may be replaced by ¯μj

when τ > ¯μj , with the trivial bound used otherwise. If that DKW-based bound is at most α on every offline realization in G, then the unconditional probability of any alarm in the stream is at most 

min {1, α + β}. Selecting the threshold on known-source validation data alone does not establish this premise. 

Proposition B.3 (Persistence enlarges the validation-feasible threshold set) . For every stream and deterministic threshold, a Persist-L alarm implies a single-crossing alarm. Hence on any fixed collection of stationary or KK validation streams, the empirical Persist-L alarm rate is no larger than the single-crossing rate at the same threshold; under common alarm caps, the set of feasible thresholds for Persist-L contains that of single crossing. 

Why persistence helps after calibration. At any fixed threshold, Persist-L is at least as conservative as single crossing. Its empirical gain comes from recalibration : by removing short excursions under known sources, persistence enlarges the set of thresholds satisfying the validation caps (Proposition B.3), which allows a lower threshold. This is consistent with the short-horizon comparison under common caps, where KU detection increases from 0 .3755 for single crossing to 0.4663 for Persist-3 (Table 4). 

Proposition B.4 (Score-space identifiability limit) . Fix O and compare i.i.d. streams from Q and 

Pj . If the one-observation vector (p1(X), . . . , p K (X)) has the same law under both sources, then any detector using only these score vectors, with the same fixed initial state, has the same alarm-time law. The statement also holds conditional on a common pre-change history when each future stream is i.i.d. and independent of that history. 

That is, an unseen source that induces the same distribution of p-values as a known source cannot be detected by any detector based on these p-values, whatever its memory. In particular, if Q and Pj induce the same distribution of Π( X), then every score and p-value computed from this projection has the same distribution under the two sources. Thus, changes confined to the discarded directions can be invisible to the detector. This limits power. However, it does not affect the validity of the source-wise conformal calibration. 16 Corollary B.5 (Post-change delay on disjoint blocks) . Under Theorem 4.6, suppose Q persists for 

H observations starting at ν, where H ∈ N ∪ {∞} . Let 

q = L

> K

X

> k=1

exp {− 2W ∆2

> k

(Q)/b 2

> k

} < 1, B = W + L − 1,

and define the delay to the first fully post-change alarm of the continued statistic Dt (Section 3.4) by 

Tν,H = inf {d ∈ N : B ≤ d ≤ H, D ν+d−1 = 1 }, inf ∅ = ∞.

For each integer m ≥ 0 with mB ≤ H,

PQ{Tν,H > mB | O} ≤ qm.

For finite H, this gives PQ{Tν,H = ∞ | O} ≤ q⌊H/B ⌋. If H = ∞, it also gives 

EQ[Tν, ∞ | O ] ≤ B

1 − q .

These bounds concern the continued statistic, not delay conditional on successful detection within a finite horizon or on the detector not having stopped before ν.

Corollary B.6 (Post-enrollment coverage under conditional exchangeability) . Let H specify the enrollment history, the enlarged set of K + 1 joint laws of (X, Y ), and fixed outcome-prediction scores sk. For each source k, suppose its labeled calibration block of size Nk and a future labeled observation from that source are exchangeable conditional on H. The block of the new source is collected after the alarm and does not reuse the observations that triggered it. Define 

πk(x, y ) = 1 + PNk 

> i=1

I{sk(Xk,i , Y k,i ) ≥ sk(x, y )}

Nk + 1 , Γα(x) = {y : max  

> k≤K+1

πk(x, y ) > α }.

For every j ≤ K + 1 and α ∈ (0 , 1) ,

Pj {Y ∈ Γα(X) | H} ≥ 1 − α. 

This is the coverage part of MDCP (Yang and Jin, 2026), not an efficiency claim. Conditional exchangeability must hold for every retained source as well as the new one, and it does not follow merely from collecting new-source data after detection. Fresh independent calibration for each source after fixing its prediction score is sufficient; reusing older calibration data requires a separate justification. 

No validated post-alarm enrollment evaluation is included in the empirical claims of this paper. Corollary B.6 describes a conditional downstream use case, not an experimentally demonstrated coverage-recovery procedure. 

# C Related Work 

Conformal prediction. Conformal prediction provides a general framework for constructing prediction sets with finite-sample, distribution-free validity under exchangeability (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer and Vovk, 2008). In split conformal prediction, the available data are divided into training and calibration subsets. A predictive model or nonconformity score is fitted using the training data, 17 while the held-out calibration data determine the finite-sample prediction threshold. For a target miscoverage level α ∈ (0 , 1), this construction provides marginal coverage of at least 1 − α without requiring a correctly specified predictive model (Lei et al., 2018; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023). This model-agnostic property is particularly useful when the underlying predictor is a complex neural network or large language model. Our detection problem uses conformal calibration for a different purpose. Rather than con-structing only a prediction set for a downstream label, we first convert source-wise scores into calibrated source-wise p-values, which measure how typical a prompt is under each known source. A separate set of conformal quantities is reserved for downstream prediction of the jailbreak outcome (Corollary B.6). This distinction between calibration for detecting unseen sources and calibration for outcome prediction is central to the proposed framework. 

Conformal prediction across multiple sources. Classical conformal prediction assumes that calibration and future observations are exchangeable. This assumption becomes more restrictive when data originate from heterogeneous populations or sources. Multi-source conformal methods study how prediction validity can be retained when calibration data arise from multiple distributions (Liu et al., 2024b; Spjuth et al., 2019). One class of approaches calibrates separately for each source and aggregates the resulting source-wise evidence. Weighted combinations of conformal p-values can improve the efficiency of such combined prediction sets (Wong et al., 2025). Multi-distribution robust conformal prediction (MDCP) further considers prediction sets that provide coverage simultaneously across a collection of calibrated distributions (Yang and Jin, 2026). Its guarantee covers mixtures of the calibrated sources as well as each source separately, so a deployment distribution that equals no single Pk may still lie inside its coverage guarantee. Therefore, our question is not whether the coverage of MDCP still holds. Instead, we ask whether the current segment is generated by a single calibrated source, that is, whether 

Q / ∈ { P1, . . . , P K },

which is the quantity a defender needs in order to decide whether the calibrated source family still describes the incoming traffic. An alarm signals that this membership is implausible; it does not by itself establish that downstream prediction sets have lost coverage. If the detected source is later enrolled as PK+1 with a fresh calibration block, MDCP applies to the enlarged family under the conditions of Corollary B.6. 

Conformal prediction under distribution shift. A complementary line of work studies conformal inference when the test distribution differs from the calibration distribution. Covariate-shift methods reweight calibration observations when the density ratio between training and test distributions can be estimated (Tibshirani et al., 2019). More recent approaches consider unknown changes in subpopulation proportions and adapt calibration thresholds or weights to preserve prediction validity under such shifts (Wang et al., 2025a). These methods primarily address changes within a specified or estimable shift model. The question considered in this paper is different. We do not assume that the unseen source can be expressed through a known density ratio, subpopulation mixture, or predetermined shift family. Instead, we first ask whether the observed stream is still generated by any of the calibrated sources. This changes the problem from adapting a prediction threshold under a known form of shift to detecting when the set of calibrated sources itself is insufficient. 18 Online conformal prediction. Online conformal methods address sequential prediction when the data distribution may evolve over time. Adaptive conformal inference updates miscoverage thresholds as observations arrive (Gibbs and Candes, 2021), while related methods extend these ideas to time series and other nonstationary settings (Zaffran et al., 2022). Decaying step-size procedures can improve stability when the underlying stream is approximately stationary (Angelopoulos et al., 2024). Online conformal ideas have also been applied to downstream objectives in LLM systems, including fairness-aware decision rules (Fayyazi et al., 2025). Our objective differs from online threshold adaptation. We model the stream as segments, each generated by a single source (Section 3.1), and test whether the current distribution belongs to the finite collection 

{P1, . . . , P K }.

Therefore, the main online quantity is a test statistic for this hypothesis, not an adaptively updated threshold for outcome prediction. 

Jailbreak attacks and evolving attack distributions. Jailbreak attacks attempt to induce policy-violating behavior from aligned language models through adversarial prompting strategies (Zou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Attack mechanisms include optimization-based suffixes, automated black-box search, and iterative prompt generation. Benchmarking frameworks such as HarmBench and JailbreakBench provide standardized protocols for evaluating attack success and guardrail robustness (Mazeika et al., 2024; Chao et al., 2024). A central challenge is that jailbreak strategies evolve over time. Longitudinal evaluations demonstrate that detection systems can experience substantial degradation under attack distribution shift (Piet et al., 2025). Recent guardrail surveys similarly emphasize that performance varies across attacks and that generalization to new strategies remains an important deployment challenge (Wang et al., 2025b). This motivates treating the attack source itself as a statistical object that may change during deployment. Piet et al. (2025) also propose two stream-level defenses. Their continuous detector is retrained on its own predictions, and their active monitor recognizes jailbreaks by whether they make the model answer known harmful prompts. Our detector uses different information. Specifically, it keeps the source calibration frozen and uses victim-model representations before any response is returned. Thus, it tests whether a recent segment is explained by any known source. Our benchmark replay does not compare against their procedures, so we make no claim of empirical superiority over them. 

Representation-space analysis of jailbreak attacks. Several recent studies analyze jailbreak behavior through internal LLM representations, not only through prompt text. Lin et al. (2024) show that harmful and benign prompts can occupy distinct regions of hidden representation space in aligned language models. Subsequent work further studies safety boundaries in representation space (Gao et al., 2025) and analyzes jailbreak behavior through model circuits and refusal-related pathways (He et al., 2024). Representation-based safeguarding methods also manipulate internal model signals to steer generation toward safer behavior (Zheng et al., 2024). These observations motivate our use of the victim-model hidden representation Xt as the detection signal. The detector does not require the jailbreak outcome during deployment. The score measures how typical Xt is under attack source k. It does not measure whether the current prompt is itself a successful jailbreak. 

Prompt-level detection and stream-level detection of unseen sources. Most jailbreak guardrails are naturally formulated as prompt-level or response-level classifiers. Their objective is 19 to determine whether a specific prompt, response, or interaction should be considered unsafe. Our problem is related but statistically distinct. We consider 

H0 : Q ∈ { P1, . . . , P K },

where Q denotes the distribution generating the current segment. The goal is therefore not to assign a harmfulness label to one observation. Instead, we determine whether the stream is still generated by at least one known attack source. This distinction also clarifies the role of our method in a deployed safety system. A prompt-level guardrail can continue to screen individual inputs, while the proposed detector signals when the distribution of incoming attack representations has changed enough to warrant escalation, enrollment of a new source, or recalibration. Therefore, the two mechanisms can operate together as complements, which is the design evaluated in Section 5.3. 

Relation to e-detectors. The closest sequential change-detection literature deserves a detailed comparison. Shin et al. (2022) construct e-detectors by aggregating e-processes started at candidate change points and analyze false-alarm control in terms of the average run length (ARL). Saha and Ramdas (2026) develop non-partitioned e-detectors over broad composite distribution classes with guarantees on the ARL or the probability of false alarm (PFA) under suitable weighting. Those constructions already handle composite nulls by taking an infimum over the candidate null distributions. Thus, aggregating over the K known sources is not by itself a new device. However, our null hypothesis differs in what it contains, namely a set of calibrated sources. Thus, a switch from Pi to Pj is not a detection target when both are known. The window-based statistic is therefore designed for finite forgetting and for testing whether one known source explains a whole recent window, not for accumulating evidence for an arbitrary change point. Table 3 summarizes the differences. Table 3: Comparison with the cited common-law change-detection formulation. The entries describe the stated null hypotheses and do not claim a limitation of every e-detector construction. “KK switch” is a switch between two known sources; ARL is the average run length and PFA the probability of false alarm.            

> Aspect Cited common-law formulation Persist-Lin this work Null hypothesis one common no-change law from a spec-ified class the current segment follows one known source KK switch departs from the common-law null not a target; a decision that mixes two known sources can still alarm Composite structure candidate null laws can be combined by an infimum source minimum is taken after window av-eraging Memory cumulative, or restarted at candidate change points recent window (Persist-3) or cumulative (SR-DKW) Main guarantee ARL or PFA control, depending on the construction source-wise conformal validity, finite for-getting, fixed-window power Role of e-processes main detection statistic auxiliary check only (Appendix F)

Sequential hypothesis testing and e-processes. Repeated detection introduces an additional statistical challenge. A fixed-time hypothesis test does not automatically retain its validity when the practitioner checks a statistic at every step and stops whenever sufficient evidence is observed. Nonnegative supermartingales and e-processes provide a natural framework for controlling this form of repeated testing. 20 Known-source calibration 

> Source-wise scores + conformal calibration

=⇒ 

> Source-wise evidence
> Conformal pk,t
> against each known source

=⇒          

> Aggregation (different orders) Persist-3: window mean per source
> →min over sources →Lcrossings
> SR-DKW: DKW adjust →max over sources →SR recursion

=⇒

> Action
> Escalate on top of an unchanged guardrail

Figure 1: Overview of the pipeline. The two detectors combine the same source-wise conformal 

p-values in different orders. Persist-3 averages the evidence against each known source over a recent window and only then takes the minimum over sources. Thus, one known source must explain the whole window (Section 3.3). In contrast, SR-DKW takes the largest DKW-adjusted p-value over sources at each step and accumulates over the whole history (Appendix F). An alarm activates escalation on top of an unchanged guardrail, which keeps screening every prompt. Realized alarm rates are in Table 1. For completeness, Appendix F records a DKW-adjusted product statistic that has crossing control under a fixed known source, conditional on a high-probability calibration event. This statistic is not one of our detectors, does not appear in the comparisons, and is empirically very conservative. SR-DKW and SR-RAW are separate cumulative recursions and are not covered by that result. The multi-source structure nevertheless introduces the same logical requirement: 

H0 =

> K

[

> k=1

H0,k , H 0,k : Q = Pk.

Rejecting a single H0,k does not establish an unseen source. The product statistic instead accumulates, at each step, the largest p-value over sources; it does not run separate source-wise sequential tests. The main paper therefore does not use the product statistic as evidence of better performance. The central comparison is between the window-based Persist-3 and the cumulative SR detectors under the same calibration on known sources. 

Positioning of the proposed framework. The proposed framework combines ideas that have usually been studied separately. Multi-source conformal methods provide uncertainty guarantees across heterogeneous calibrated distributions. Online and sequential methods provide tools for repeated testing over a stream. Jailbreak detection methods exploit model outputs or internal representations to identify unsafe or anomalous behavior. Our contribution lies at their intersection. We use victim-model representations to construct source-wise conformal evidence, formulate the detection of unseen sources as a test of a union of source hypotheses, use a recent window for the finite-memory detector, and connect a detection event to stream-level escalation on top of prompt-level guardrails and, under additional conditions, to fresh enrollment of the new source and downstream multi-distribution conformal prediction. 

# D Implementation Details of Persist-3 

Precedent for the persistence rule. Requiring L consecutive crossings is the special case 

M = N = L of the M -out-of-N rule in radar detection, which declares a detection when at least M

of N successive tests exceed a threshold (Schwartz, 1956). It is also closely related to the runs rules used with Shewhart control charts (Champ and Woodall, 1987). 21 Algorithm 1 Persist-L (Persist-3 uses W = 10, L = 3)                                                                                                       

> 1: Input: known-source training and calibration data; stream {Xt}; window length W; persistence length L;threshold bτselected by known-source validation for the protocol in use (values in the Calibration paragraph below) 2: Fit a shared PCA map Π on pooled known-source training data, with dimension at most 32 3: for k= 1 , . . . , K do
> 4: Fit bμkand Ledoit–Wolf bΣkon Π( X) from source k
> 5: Store Rk={Sk(Xi) : Xi∈ D (k)cal }
> 6: end for
> 7: for t= 1 ,2, . . . do
> 8: Observe Xtand set zt←Π( Xt)9: for k= 1 , . . . , K do
> 10: Sk,t ←(zt−bμk)⊤bΣ+
> k(zt−bμk)11: pk,t ←1 + P
> r∈R kI{r≥Sk,t }|R k|+ 1 12: Ck,t ←mean of −log pk,r over r= max(1 , t −W+ 1) , . . . , t
> 13: end for
> 14: Cfam
> t←min kCk,t
> 15: if t≥Land Cfam
> s≥bτfor all s=t−L+ 1 , . . . , t then
> 16: return (true , t )17: end if
> 18: end for
> 19: return (false ,NA)

Calibration. In the short-horizon protocol, the caps of Section 3.5 are set from the validation alarm rates FPR single val and KK single val of the single-crossing rule: FPR cap = max {0.025 , FPR single val }, KK cap = max {0.05 , KK single val }.

For the frozen experiment, these caps are 0 .031313 and 0 .051678. With W = 10 and L = 3 fixed, and 

T the prespecified grid of 1183 candidate thresholds, bτ = min 

n

τ ∈ T : [FPR val (τ ) ≤ 0.031313 , dKK val (τ ) ≤ 0.051678 

o

which gives bτ ≈ 2.386 on the original split, with validation FPR 0 .00502 and validation KK alarm rate 0 .04980. For the robustness resplit (Appendix A), the same rule gives bτ = 2 .374. The long-horizon protocol of Section 5.1 uses its own caps (stationary alarm ≤ 0.01, KK alarm ≤ 0.05). The selected thresholds are 2 .556 for Persist-3, 68 .69 for SR-DKW full, 2 .84 × 10 39 for SR-RAW full, 27 .12 for SR-DKW with W = 10, and 141 .7 for SR-RAW with W = 10. Since these thresholds live on method-specific scales, they are not comparable across methods. No KU data are used to choose W , L, or τ . Persist-3 uses the raw split-conformal p-values; it does not use the DKW correction or the betting functions of Appendix F. Since the thresholds of different methods live on method-specific scales, we report realized alarm counts in Table 1 and do not call the methods exactly FPR-matched. 

# E Historical Known-to-Known Traces 

Figure 2 shows traces of the family statistic Cfam  

> t

on KK streams under a historical protocol, in which the threshold is set per configuration at the 99th percentile ( Q99 ) of validation values. These panels are retained only as finite-window recovery illustrations and are not frozen-protocol Persist-3 case studies. The frozen-protocol evidence for finite forgetting is the path-identity check and the alarm-timing result of Appendix I.3, not this figure. 22 0 20 40                       

> Time t
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> Cfam,  t
> AdvBench, Llama-2, ADC → FlipAttack, seed 11, cp=24
> Case 1: window recovers after KK switch
> Cfam
> per-cell Q99 τ= 2.315
> 020 40
> Time t
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> Cfam,  t
> AdvBench, Llama-3.1, Dist. Jailbreak → AutoDAN-Turbo, seed 11, cp=24
> Case 2: window and cumulative both alarm
> Cfam
> per-cell Q99 τ= 2.228
> 020 40
> Time t
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> Cfam,  t
> AdvBench, Llama-2, PAIR → ADC, seed 11, cp=24
> Case 3: borderline KK transition
> Cfam
> per-cell Q99 τ= 3.046
> Historical per-cell Q99 on Cfam (not frozen Persist-3 τ= 2.3855)

Figure 2: Traces of the family statistic Cfam 

t on KK streams under a historical per-configuration 

Q99 threshold protocol. The X-axis is the stream position and the Y-axis is the family statistic. These are historical illustrations: the thresholds shown are per-configuration Q99 values, not the frozen bτ of Appendix D, and the panels are not Persist-3 case studies under the frozen protocol. 

# F DKW-Adjusted Product and SR Detectors 

This section defines the DKW-adjusted quantities used by SR-DKW and gives a validity result for a related product statistic. The result is a sanity check only: it does not apply to Persist-3, SR-DKW, or SR-RAW, and it gives no control under KK switches. Let 

εk(β) = 

s

log(2 K/β )2nk

, epk(x) = min {1, p k(x) + εk(β)}, epfam 

t = max 

k∈[K] epk(Xt),

with β = 0 .05, and let gλ(p) = 1 + λ(1 − 2p) for λ ∈ [0 , 1]. SR-DKW updates Rt,λ = (1 + 

Rt−1,λ ) gλ(epfam 

t ) with R0,λ = 0, and SR-RAW applies the same recursion to pfam 

t = max k pk(Xt). Both are empirical comparators; we do not prove guarantees for them. For the product statistic, fix a grid Λ = {λm}Mm=1 ⊂ [0 , 1] and weights wm ≥ 0 with P

m wm = 1 before the stream starts, and define 

E(m)

t =

tY

s=1 

gλm (epfam 

s ), E mix 

t = X

m

wmE(m)

t .

Here the maximum over sources is taken at each step before the product over time. 

Lemma 2 (DKW-adjusted inclusive upper-tail validity) . Use Fk, bFk, ε k from Lemma 1, and let Gk

be the kth event in the intersection defining G. Define pscore 

k (s) = (1 + # {i : Rk,i ≥ s})/(nk + 1) and 

epscore 

k (s) = min {1, p score 

k (s) + εk}. On Gk,

epscore 

k (s) ≥ 1 − Fk(s−), s ∈ R.

Consequently, for every fixed O in Gk and fresh X ∼ Pk independent of O, epk(X) = epscore 

k (Sk(X)) 

is super-uniform conditional on O. No continuity assumption is required. 

Theorem F.1 (Fixed-source product crossing control) . Under Assumption 4.1, let G be the event in Lemma 1. Suppose the entire stream is i.i.d. from a fixed known source Pj . For every offline 

23 realization O in G, each E(m) 

> t

and Emix  

> t

, initialized at one, is a nonnegative supermartingale conditional on O, with filtration Ft = σ(O, X 1, . . . , X t). Thus, for δ ∈ (0 , 1) ,

PPj



sup 

> t≥0

Emix  

> t

≥ 1/δ | O 



≤ δ on G.

Averaging over offline data gives 

PPj



sup 

> t≥0

Emix  

> t

≥ 1/δ 



≤ δ + (1 − δ)P(Gc) ≤ δ + β. 

For δ = β = 0 .05 , the bound is 0.10 ; observing zero alarms does not reduce it. 

Theorem F.1 holds conditional on the calibration event G and does not make Emix  

> t

an uncondi-tional e-process. Empirically, at α = 0 .05, the same product with raw p-values alarms on about 0.184 of stationary streams, and for about 11 .9% of (configuration, λ) pairs the empirical mean of 

gλ exceeds 1 .01. The DKW-adjusted product raises no alarm on stationary streams and has an empirical mean of gλ of about 0 .781, so it is very conservative. 

# G Proofs 

G.1 Proof of Proposition 4.2 

Proof. Condition on all training information T , including the pooled data used to fit the shared PCA map. The nk calibration scores and one fresh score are exchangeable. Rank the nk + 1 scores in descending order, i.e., assign rank 1 to the largest score, and break ties uniformly at random. Then the rank R of the fresh score is uniform on {1, . . . , n k + 1 }. The inclusive upper-tail conformal value satisfies pk(X) ≥ R/ (nk + 1). Therefore 

P{pk(X) ≤ u | T } ≤ ⌊(nk + 1) u⌋

nk + 1 ≤ u. 

With no ties, equality with the normalized rank gives the discrete-uniform statement. Averaging over T gives marginal validity; conditioning additionally on the realized calibration set need not preserve uniformity. 

G.2 Proof of Lemma 1 

Proof. Fix T . Assumption 4.1 makes the scores within each calibration sample i.i.d. with CDF Fk.The DKW inequality gives 

P



sup 

> s

| bFk(s) − Fk(s)| > ε k | T 



≤ 2e−2nk ε2 

> k

= β/K. 

A union bound gives P(G | T ) ≥ 1 − β, without requiring independence across sources. Fix an offline realization in G and write 

bF k(s) = 1 − bFk(s−), F k(s) = 1 − Fk(s−), p score  

> k

(s) = 1 + nk bF k(s)

nk + 1 .

The DKW bound also holds at left limits, and 

pscore  

> k

(s) ≥ bF k(s) ≥ F k(s) − εk.

24 Thus pk(X) ≤ u implies F k(Sk(X)) ≤ u+εk. For a fresh draw from Pk, F k(Sk(X)) is super-uniform, including when scores have atoms. Independence of the fresh draw from O therefore gives the conditional tail bound. Since 0 ≤ Zk ≤ bk, integrating this tail yields 

E[Zk(X) | O ] = 

Z bk

> 0

P{Zk(X) > z | O} dz ≤

Z bk

> 0

min {1, e −z + εk} dz. 

G.3 Proof of Theorem 4.3 

Proof. Suppose the true source is Pj . Because Cfam  

> s

= min k Ck,s , a Persist-L alarm at time t implies 

Cj,s ≥ τ, s = t − L + 1 , . . . , t. 

Each source-j statistic is an average over W observations, so 

> t

X

> s=t−L+1

W C j,s ≥ LW τ. 

The left-hand side is a weighted sum of the B = W + L − 1 observations entering the overlapping windows: tX

> s=t−L+1

W C j,s =

> B

X

> h=1

ahZj,h ,

where ah is the number of the L windows containing observation h. Because P 

> h

ah = LW and 

E[Zj,h | O ] = μ0,j , the alarm event implies 

> B

X

> h=1

ah(Zj,h − μ0,j ) ≥ LW (τ − μ0,j ).

Conditional on O, the Zj,h are independent and lie in [0 , b j ]. The weighted Hoeffding inequality therefore yields 

P{Dt = 1 | O} ≤ exp 

(

− 2L2W 2(τ − μ0,j )2

b2

> j

P 

> h

a2

> h

)

,

which is Eq. (7). For W ≥ L, the overlap counts are 1, 2, . . . , L − 1, L, . . . , L 

| {z } 

> W−L+1 terms

, L − 1, . . . , 2, 1,

which gives Eq. (6). 

G.4 Proof of Corollary B.1 

Proof. On the event of Lemma 1, μ0,j = EPj [Zj (X) | O ] ≤ ¯μj . If τ > ¯μj , then τ − μ0,j ≥ τ − ¯μj > 0. Substituting this smaller gap into Theorem 4.3 gives the bound. 25 G.5 Proof of Corollary B.2 

Proof. For each t ≥ L, an alarm implies Cj,s ≥ τ at all L required times. Summing the window averages, including their startup denominators, gives 

> t

X

> s=t−L+1

Cj,s =

> t

X

> r=1

vt,r Zj (Xr) ≥ Lτ, 

> t

X

> r=1

vt,r = L. 

Conditional on O, the summands depend on independent observations and lie in intervals of length 

vt,r bj . The weighted Hoeffding inequality gives ρj,t when the mean gap is positive; otherwise the probability is at most one. A union bound over {Dt = 1 } for L ≤ t ≤ H gives the bound without independence across overlapping windows. For full windows, the nonzero weights are ah/W , so 

Vt = AW,L /W 2. On G, replace the mean by its upper bound as in Corollary B.1. If the resulting sum is at most α on every offline realization in G, integrate over O and add P(Gc) ≤ β.

G.6 Proof of Proposition 4.4 

Proof. At time t ≥ B, the earliest observation entering any of the L windows is Xt−B+1 . All other inputs to the decision are frozen offline objects. Thus, Dt is a function of Xt−B+1 , . . . , X t, and two streams sharing this block have the same decision. If t ≥ ν + B − 1, this block excludes every observation before ν. If the block also lies in a known-source segment from Pj , its observations are i.i.d. conditional on O by Assumption 4.1. Then Theorem 4.3 applies when τ > μ 0,j . These statements concern the continued statistic, not the action taken after the first alarm. 

G.7 Proof of Proposition B.3 

Proof. A Persist-L alarm in a stream requires L consecutive threshold crossings, which contain at least one crossing. Therefore A(L) 

> e

(τ ) ≤ A(1)  

> e

(τ ) for every stream e and threshold τ , where A(L) 

> e

(τ )indicates a Persist-L alarm. Averaging over any fixed validation collection gives brL(τ ) ≤ br1(τ ) for the empirical alarm rates. Hence every threshold feasible for single crossing under given caps is also feasible for Persist-L.

G.8 Proof of Theorem 4.6 

Proof. For each source k and each full post-change window, 

EQZk(X) = τ + ∆ k(Q), 0 ≤ Zk(X) ≤ bk.

Hoeffding’s lower-tail inequality gives 

PQ{Ck,s < τ | O} ≤ exp 



− 2W ∆2

> k

(Q)

b2

> k



.

The event Cfam  

> s

≥ τ fails only if at least one of the K source statistics is below τ , so a union bound over k gives 

PQ{Cfam  

> s

< τ | O} ≤ 

> K

X

> k=1

exp 



− 2W ∆2

> k

(Q)

b2

> k



.

Persist-L fails at time t if at least one of its L required crossings fails. A second union bound over these L times gives Eq. (8). No independence among the overlapping windows is required. 26 G.9 Proof of Corollary 4.7 

Proof. Because ∆ k(Q) ≥ ∆∗(Q) and bk ≤ bmax for every k,exp 



− 2W ∆2

> k

(Q)

b2

> k



≤ exp 



− 2W ∆2

> ∗

(Q)

b2max 



.

Substituting this bound into Theorem 4.6 yields Eq. (9). 

G.10 Proof of Corollary B.5 

Proof. Fix O and consider tm = ν + mB − 1 for integers m ≥ 1 with mB ≤ H. The decision Dtm

uses a block contained in [ ν + ( m − 1) B, ν + mB − 1]. These blocks are disjoint and independent under the i.i.d. segment assumption, and each failure probability is at most q by Theorem 4.6. If 

Tν,H > mB , the first m block decisions must all fail, so 

PQ{Tν,H > mB | O} ≤ 

> m

Y

> ℓ=1

PQ{Dtℓ = 0 | O} ≤ qm.

The case m = 0 is trivial. For finite H, no eligible alarm implies failure at the ⌊H/B ⌋ block endpoints, giving the miss bound. For H = ∞, summing the delay tail in groups of B terms gives 

EQ[Tν, ∞ | O ] = 

> ∞

X

> d=0

PQ{Tν, ∞ > d | O} ≤ B

> ∞

X

> m=0

qm = B

1 − q .

Only fully post-change decisions enter, so mixed windows need not be controlled. 

G.11 Proof of Proposition B.4 

Proof. Fix O and the common initial state. By independence across observations, the law of the score process is the product of its one-observation laws. Equality of these laws under Q and Pj

therefore gives equality of the entire score-process laws, and hence of any measurable alarm-time law. The same argument applies conditional on a common history when both future streams are independent of it. For dependent streams, equality of one-observation laws alone would not suffice. 

G.12 Proof of Lemma 2 

Proof. For a fixed offline realization in Gk, the argument in Lemma 1 gives 

pscore  

> k

(s) ≥ 1 − bFk(s−) ≥ 1 − Fk(s−) − εk.

Adding εk and truncating at one preserves domination of 1 − Fk(s−) ∈ [0 , 1]. Since 1 − Fk(Sk(X)−)is super-uniform for a fresh draw, so is the inflated value, including for score distributions with atoms. 27 G.13 Proof of Theorem F.1 

Proof. Fix O in G. The fresh observation Xt ∼ Pj is independent of the past conditional on 

O. Lemma 2 gives conditional super-uniformity of epj (Xt), and epfam  

> t

≥ epj (Xt). Because gλ is non-increasing for 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1, 

E[gλ(epfam  

> t

) | F t−1] ≤ E[gλ(epj (Xt)) | F t−1] ≤

Z 10

[1 + λ(1 − 2u)] du = 1 .

Each factor is nonnegative, so each product starting at one is a nonnegative supermartingale, and so is their convex combination with fixed weights. Ville’s inequality gives the conditional crossing bound. Integrating over G and using probability at most one on Gc gives δ + (1 −δ)P(Gc) ≤ δ +β.

G.14 Proof of Corollary B.6 

Proof. Fix an enrollment history H satisfying the assumptions and a true source j. Conditional exchangeability of its calibration and future labeled scores gives Pj {πj (X, Y ) ≤ α | H} ≤ α by the rank argument in Proposition 4.2. Since max k πk(X, Y ) ≥ πj (X, Y ), exclusion from Γ α(X) implies 

πj (X, Y ) ≤ α. This proves coverage for each source without independence across calibration blocks. If the enrollment decision depended on an old calibration set, exchangeability for that set cannot be inferred from its original marginal validity, and a fresh block for the new source does not repair this. 

# H Additional Operating Points 

H.1 Short-horizon comparison 

Before the main comparison in Section 5.1, we compared methods on short streams of 40 observations per segment, with looser caps: validation stationary FPR ≤ 0.05 and validation KK alarm rate ≤ 0.05. For each method, the most aggressive threshold satisfying both caps is chosen on known-source validation streams only. We write OUT-WIN for the aggregation used by Persist-3: average − log pk of each source over a window of W = 10 observations, and then take the minimum over sources, which gives Cfam  

> t

in (4). The methods in Table 4 are as follows. 

• Persist-3 OUT-WIN-W 10 is Persist-3 (Algorithm 1). 

• Single-crossing OUT-WIN-W 10 uses the same Cfam  

> t

but alarms at the first crossing, i.e., L = 1. 

• Mean-p conformal window averages the source-wise conformal p-values, pmean  

> t

= K−1 P 

> k

pk,t , and uses the mean of − log pmean  

> t

over the last W = 10 observations. It does not take the minimum over sources. 

• Family min-kNN window works in the PCA space without conformal p-values. For each source 

k, it uses the average distance to the q nearest calibration points of that source, Sknn  

> k

(x) = 

q−1 Pqj=1 ∥Π( x) − Π( x(k)(j) )∥2, where x(k)(j) is the jth nearest one and q ∈ { 5, 10 , 20 } is chosen once per configuration by the area under the ROC curve (AUROC) on known-source validation data. It then averages Sknn  

> k

over the last W = 10 observations and takes the minimum over sources. 28 Table 4: Short-horizon comparison on the 330 configurations. “Val” and “Test” denote validation and test streams; FPR is the stationary alarm rate, KK the alarm rate on streams with a known-to-known switch, and KU the detection rate on streams with a known-to-unknown switch. Mean delay is over detected streams.                                              

> Method Val FPR Val KK Test FPR Test KK Test KU Mean delay Persist-3 OUT-WIN-W10 0.0050 0.0495 0.0000 0.0349 0.4663 8.94 Single-crossing OUT-WIN-W10 0.0466 0.0439 0.0256 0.0494 0.3755 7.45 SR-RAW 0.0500 0.0017 0.0207 0.0477 0.7990 13.18 SR-DKW 0.0491 0.0027 0.0134 0.0215 0.6926 12.19 Mean-pconformal window 0.0466 0.0001 0.0313 0.0001 0.2148 12.36 Family min-kNN window 0.0027 0.0481 0.0046 0.0463 0.1569 7.07

We also evaluated two variants that use the Mahalanobis score without conformal calibration. 

Family min-Mahalanobis window uses SMk,t = ( Zt − bμk)⊤ bΣ+ 

> k

(Zt − bμk) with Zt = Π( Xt), averages it over the last mt observations, and takes the minimum over sources, CMt = min k m−1

> t

Ptu=t−mt+1 SMk,u ;

Persist-3 on raw Mahalanobis window requires three consecutive crossings of CMt . Neither raw-Mahalanobis variant had a feasible operating point within the prespecified threshold grid under the known-only validation caps, so neither has an operating point to report. The grids were n = 1169 candidates with τ ∈ [3 .00 , 413 .41] for the min-Mahalanobis window and n = 1174 candidates with 

τ ∈ [3 .00 , 166 .52] for Persist-3 on the raw Mahalanobis window. This is a statement about the grid, not an impossibility: on a finite validation set, a threshold above every observed statistic never alarms and would trivially satisfy both caps, but such thresholds lie outside the prespecified grid. CUSUM satisfies the caps on validation streams but has a test KK alarm rate of 0 .991, because short validation streams do not reproduce the state that CUSUM accumulates over long KK streams. After matching validation and test lengths, CUSUM has KU detection 0 (Appendix H.6), so we do not use it as a comparator. 

H.2 Window length 

Table 5: Persist-3 with different window lengths W , under the short-horizon calibration of the previous subsection.                     

> WτTest FPR Test KK Test KU Mean delay 32.2627 0.0227 0.0209 0.5228 11.80 52.1263 0.0191 0.0593 0.5723 9.52 10 2.3861 0.0000 0.0349 0.4663 8.94

Neither W = 3 nor W = 5 is better than W = 10 in all of FPR, KK alarm rate, and KU detection. We keep W = 10, which was fixed in advance for its low stationary alarm rate, and do not select W

by KU results. Detectability also varies across victim models and attack sources (Figure 5a). We report these differences and do not select models. 29 stationary KK post KU post 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> fraction of exceedance runs

PERSIST primary tau=2.39; L not retuned  

> run=1 run=2 run 3

Figure 3: Run-length distribution of threshold exceedances of the pre-persistence family statistic 

Cfam  

> t

, on the original 330-configuration split for Persist-3 with W = 10, L = 3 (not retuned) and 

bτ = 2 .386. A run is a maximal block of consecutive positions with Cfam  

> t

≥ bτ . The X-axis separates stationary streams, post-switch KK segments and post-switch KU segments; the Y-axis is the fraction of exceedance runs of length 1, 2, or at least 3. Runs are taken over full stationary streams and over the post-switch part of KK and KU streams. Fractions are normalized over exceedance runs, not over streams, so a stream with no exceedance contributes no run: the counts are 79 stationary runs, 4471 post-switch KK runs and 1622 post-switch KU runs. Figure 3 is the empirical counterpart of the persistence rule: Persist-3 fires exactly when such a run reaches length L = 3, so the mass at length ≥ 3 under known sources is what the threshold has to suppress, and the mass at length ≥ 3 on post-switch KU segments is what it has to keep. 

H.3 Persistence length 

This subsection examines how the persistence length L affects the detector. We rerun all 330 original-split configurations under the short-horizon protocol, with W = 10 and the PCA dimension 32 fixed. For each L ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4}, the threshold τ is recalibrated by the known-only rule of Section 3.5, under the same caps as Persist-3 (0 .031313 for stationary alarms and 0 .051678 for KK alarms). No unseen-source data are used. Rates are source-macro averages with 95% intervals from a bootstrap over held-out sources (5000 replicates, seed 11). Table 6: Detectors with different persistence lengths L (330 configurations, short-horizon protocol, 

W = 10). τ is recalibrated for each L on known-source validation streams. L = 3 is the primary choice, fixed in advance. Delay is the mean delay over detected streams.                                         

> LτFPR ↓KK ↓KU ↑Delay 12.997 0.016 [0 .014 ,0.018] 0.000 [0 .000 ,0.001] 0.207 [0 .139 ,0.301] 7.78 22.541 0.000 [0 .000 ,0.000] 0.035 [0 .024 ,0.040] 0.428 [0 .319 ,0.579] 8.62 3 (primary) 2.386 0.000 [0 .000 ,0.000] 0.035 [0 .024 ,0.040] 0.467 [0 .352 ,0.623] 8.94 42.234 0.000 [0 .000 ,0.000] 0.039 [0 .027 ,0.045] 0.521 [0 .384 ,0.693] 9.99

30 Table 6 gives three observations. First, persistence is necessary. With L = 1, even the high recalibrated threshold leaves stationary false alarms (0 .016), and it gives a low KU detection rate (0 .207). Second, for L ≥ 2, the stationary FPR is zero and the KK alarm rate stays between 0 .035 and 0 .039. Third, KU detection increases with L (0 .428 → 0.467 → 0.521), while the mean delay also grows (8 .62 → 8.94 → 9.99). Thus, L trades detection against delay. Note that L = 3 is not claimed to be optimal. It was fixed in advance by the known-only pilot, and we do not reselect it using KU results. Finally, the recalibrated L = 1 operating point differs from the single-crossing row of Table 4, which uses a different threshold rule, so the two should not be compared directly. 

H.4 PCA dimension 

This subsection examines how the PCA dimension d of the shared map Π affects Persist-3. We rerun all 330 original-split configurations from the cached embeddings under the short-horizon protocol, with W = 10 and L = 3 fixed. For each d, the threshold τ is recalibrated by the same known-only rule of Section 3.5, and no unseen-source data are used. Rates are source-macro averages with 95% intervals, as in Table 8. Table 7: Persist-3 with different PCA dimensions d (330 configurations, short-horizon protocol). τ

is recalibrated for each d on known-source validation streams. KK is the alarm rate on streams with a known-to-known switch, KU the detection rate on streams with a known-to-unknown switch, and Delay the mean delay over detected streams.                               

> dτKK ↓KU ↑Delay 82.380 0.029 [0 .022 ,0.034] 0.353 [0 .251 ,0.522] 8.32 16 2.386 0.040 [0 .027 ,0.047] 0.417 [0 .316 ,0.563] 9.28 32 (primary) 2.386 0.035 [0 .024 ,0.040] 0.467 [0 .352 ,0.623] 8.28 64 2.392 0.036 [0 .024 ,0.042] 0.465 [0 .335 ,0.611] 8.30

Table 7 gives two observations. First, the KK alarm rate is insensitive to d, staying between 0.029 and 0 .040. Second, KU detection increases from d = 8 to d = 32 (0 .353 → 0.417 → 0.467) and then levels off (0 .465 at d = 64). Thus, a very low dimension discards information that separates the unseen source from the known ones, while dimensions beyond 32 bring no further gain. Note that the intervals overlap across dimensions, so these differences are descriptive. The primary choice 

d = 32 was fixed before this ablation and was not selected by KU results. 

H.5 Robustness resplit 

Table 8: Original split and robustness resplit (Appendix A) under the short-horizon protocol, reported separately and never pooled. N denotes the number of streams. Delay is omitted because the robustness resplit did not store it in the same form.                     

> Evaluation FPR KK KU Nstat NKK NKU
> Original split 0/1835 0.035 0.467 1835 10640 1835 Robustness resplit 10 /2425 0.044 [0 .033 ,0.048] 0.414 [0 .282 ,0.589] 2425 17040 2425

The 95% Clopper–Pearson upper bound for the robustness-resplit stationary alarm rate is 0 .0070. 31 H.6 Lower alarm budgets, memory, and repeated switches 

We also ran a follow-up protocol on the same 330 configurations, fixed before KU results were summarized. It uses a different construction of KK validation streams and does not replace the comparisons above. 

Lower alarm budgets. In this follow-up protocol, the validation cap on stationary alarms is 0.005, with a KK cap of 0 .05. We also consider stationary caps in {0.001 , 0.01 , 0.025 , 0.05 }. At 0.005, SR-DKW stays within the cap on test streams and has KU detection 0 .6295, versus 0 .4516 for Persist-3; SR-RAW reaches 0 .7857 but has test FPR 0 .0087, above the cap. At 0 .001, neither Persist-3 nor SR-DKW raises a stationary alarm, while SR-DKW has a lower KK alarm rate (0 .0018 vs. 0 .0036) and higher KU detection (0 .580 vs. 0 .320). 

Order of aggregation and memory. With the same p-values, W , L, and calibration, OUT-WIN (average over the window, then minimum over sources, as in Persist-3) gives KU detection 0 .452, versus 0 .400 for IN-WIN, which takes the minimum over sources at each step and then averages over the window. Within the SR family, full SR-RAW has KU detection 0 .786, versus 0 .630 when truncated to W = 10, so truncation reduces power. 

Dependence on observations before a switch. The paired-stream check of finite forgetting under this protocol is reported in Appendix I.3. In addition, with thresholds fixed at the 0 .005 cap, the stationary alarm rates at horizons H = 40 , 200 , 1000 are (0 .0005 , 0.003 , 0.010) for Persist-3 and (0 , 0.035 , 0.148) for SR-DKW. Horizons longer than the test pool are generated by sampling with replacement. 

Repeated switches. When the stream switches among known sources every d steps, Persist-3 raises an alarm on a fraction 0 .61 of streams at d = 5, 0 .21 at d = 12, and 0 .027 at d = 40. When the dwell time is smaller than B, no decision block may lie entirely in one segment. Thus, the guarantees for homogeneous blocks do not cover these decisions. Note that short segments alone do not contradict the piecewise i.i.d. model. The relevant restriction is whether all observations used by a decision come from one source. Thus, these results are stress tests only. 

H.7 Dwell time shorter than the decision block 

This subsection examines how Persist-3 behaves when the attacker switches faster than its decision block of B = W + L − 1 = 12 observations. We call the number of consecutive prompts from one source the dwell time D. We use the cached streams of the 50 configurations in Appendix L, with a shared horizon of T = 328. The detector is frozen, with W = 10, L = 3, and bτ = 2 .386, and nothing is retuned. We consider two regimes. In the unknown →unknown regime, consecutive segments of length D all carry unseen-source behavior. In the known →unknown reset regime, unseen-source segments alternate with known-source segments, each of length D. Segment detection is the fraction of unseen-source segments with an alarm, and episode detection is the fraction of streams with at least one alarm on an unseen-source segment. 32 Table 9: Persist-3 under different dwell times D with the frozen detector ( W = 10, L = 3, B = 12).                  

> Unknown →unknown Known →unknown reset
> DSegment detection Episode detection Segment detection Episode detection 30.34 0.75 0.08 0.61 12 0.55 0.77 0.45 0.68 24 0.57 0.77 0.46 0.65

Table 9 gives two observations. First, under unknown →unknown switching, detection degrades gracefully. Segment detection falls from 0 .55 at D = 12 to 0 .34 at D = 3, while episode detection stays around 0 .75. Second, under known →unknown resetting, fast switching hurts much more. Segment detection falls from 0 .45 at D = 12 to 0 .08 at D = 3, since the known-source segments repeatedly pull the window back toward a known source. However, episode detection remains 0 .61 at D = 3, so fast switching does not lead to complete evasion in this test. Thus, B is a temporal resolution of the theorems, not a requirement for the detector to run. Note that a fully adaptive attacker, which observes the detector state and switches to destroy the evidence margin, is outside both our theorems and this stress test. 

# I Theory–Experiment Diagnostics 

The following diagnostics use the original split under the short-horizon protocol and are computed after the detector is frozen; they are not used for tuning. Source-level associations use the eleven held-out attack sources, with 5000 bootstrap replicates (seed 11). 

I.1 Nearest-source separation and KU detection 

For a held-out source Q with nQ test observations, the estimated nearest-source separation is 

b∆∗(Q) = min k∈[K]{bμk(Q) − τ }, bμk(Q) = 1

> nQ

PnQ 

> i=1

− log pk(Xi). It is strongly associated with KU detection: Pearson r = 0 .98 [0 .94 , 1.00] and Spearman ρ = 0 .95 [0 .70 , 1.00]; the robustness resplit gives Pearson r = 0 .981 [0 .947 , 0.995]. Thus, sources that stay close to at least one known source are hard to detect, consistent with Corollary 4.7 and Proposition B.4. These are observational associations, not independent validations of the theory. 33 −1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 

Source-mean  ̂ Δ ⋆

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0     

> KU detection
> post-hoc diagnostic Original split Pearson r= 0.981 Robustness resplit Pearson r= 0.981
> ADC AutoDAN-Turbo Direct Request Dist. Jailbreak FlipAttack GCG Human JB JB-Zero PAIR SimBAJA TAP

Original split Robustness resplit Figure 4: Source-level relation between the estimated nearest-source separation b∆∗ and KU detection, for the original split and the robustness resplit. The robustness resplit re-partitions the same cached embedding pool, so the two series are not independent samples of jailbreak behavior. 

I.2 Detection delay 

Among detected streams, the median delay of each source is positively associated with b∆∗ (Pearson 

r = 0 .84 [0 .70 , 0.96], Spearman ρ = 0 .80; robustness resplit r = 0 .866). This association is driven by selection: sources with small b∆∗ are rarely detected, and when they are, it tends to be by early chance crossings. We therefore do not treat it as a test of Corollary B.5. Since a delay summary over detected streams is a selected summary, we report the detection rate and the delay among detected streams separately. Coding missed detections as the horizon plus one mixes detection and delay, so we do not use it to validate Corollary B.5. 

I.3 Empirical checks of finite forgetting 

This subsection gives the two empirical checks of finite forgetting summarized in Section 5.1. With 

W = 10 and L = 3, Proposition 4.4 states that the decision of Persist-3 cannot depend on any pre-switch observation after B = 12 post-switch observations. 

Paired-stream check. This check uses no threshold. Under the follow-up protocol of Ap-pendix H.6, we run each detector on two streams that differ before a switch but are identical after it. In all 330 configurations, Persist-3 makes identical decisions on the two streams from B = 12 steps after the switch. In contrast, full SR keeps a different state (median absolute difference 3 .01). Thus, the finite memory of Persist-3 holds exactly in the implementation, while the cumulative state of SR keeps reflecting pre-switch evidence. 34 Timing of KK alarms. Throughout this paragraph, the delay of an alarm at time t is the number of post-switch observations it has seen, d = t − ν + 1, which the saved runs store as t − cp. In this indexing, Proposition 4.4 excludes every pre-switch observation once d ≥ B = 12. Thus, pre-switch observations can influence only the decisions with d ≤ 11. Any alarm at d ≥ 12 uses observations from the new known source alone, so it is an ordinary stationary alarm, not an effect of the old source. Finite forgetting removes the old source. However, it does not rule out later alarms. The timing of first KK alarms is reported for the frozen primary detector on the original split only: Persist-3 with W = 10, L = 3 and bτ = 2 .386. Among the NKK = 10640 KK episodes of that split, 507 have a first post-switch alarm, and all 507 /507 occur at d ≤ 11. Two points should be noted. First, the count 507 is the number of episodes with a first post-switch alarm. It is neither the source-macro KK rate nor the pooled any-alarm rate, so 507 /10640 ≈ 0.0477 is not comparable with the KK alarm rate of 0 .035 in Table 8, which is computed over a different event and aggregation. Second, the corresponding robustness-resplit timing uses the separately recalibrated bτ = 2 .374, so it belongs to a different protocol and is not reported here or shown in any frozen-protocol figure. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> KU detection
> Direct Request ADC TAP PAIR AutoDAN-Turbo GCG SimBAJA Jailbreak-Zero Human Jailbreaks FlipAttack Distribution Jailbreak Original split Robustness resplit

(a) KU detection for each of the eleven held-out attack sources, on the original split and in the ro-bustness resplit. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40          

> Post-switch delay d=talarm − cp
> 050 100 150 200
> KK first post-switch alarms  old-source influence impossible after B= 12
> 507/507 at d≤ 11
> τ= 2.386
> Original split, frozen Persist-3

(b) Timing of the first post-switch Persist-3 alarm on KK test streams of the original split, under W = 10, 

L = 3 and frozen bτ = 2 .386. The X-axis is the number of post-switch observations the alarm has seen, d = talarm − ν + 1, stored in the saved runs as 

talarm − cp. Among NKK = 10640 episodes, 507 have a first post-switch alarm, and all 507 /507 occur at 

d ≤ 11. The vertical line marks B = W + L − 1 = 12, the first value of d at which no pre-switch observation can enter the decision. 

Figure 5: Left: KU detection by held-out source. Right: frozen-protocol timing of the first post-switch KK alarm on the original split. The robustness-resplit timing uses a separately recalibrated threshold and is not shown here. 35 Table 10: Diagnostics corresponding to the theoretical results for Persist-3.                        

> Result Diagnostic Original split Robustness resplit Nearest-source separa-tion
> b∆∗vs. KU detection Pearson 0 .98; Spearman 0 .95 Pearson 0.981 [0 .947 ,0.995] Finite forgetting paired streams agree after
> B= 12 steps 330/330 configurations n/a First post-switch KK alarm timing within 11 steps, frozen
> bτ
> 507/507 of NKK = 10640 separate protocol, not re-ported Delay b∆∗vs. delay among detected Pearson 0 .84 Pearson 0 .866

# J Comparison of the Two Detectors 

Persist-3 and SR-DKW differ in two choices. For combining sources, Persist-3 averages each source over the window and then takes the minimum over sources, while SR-DKW takes the largest DKW-adjusted p-value over sources at each step. For combining over time, Persist-3 uses a recent window with persistence, while SR-DKW uses a cumulative Shiryaev–Roberts recursion. The SR recursion and the DKW inequality are standard; we use them to compare cumulative and finite memory under the same calibration. Empirically, SR-DKW detects more unseen sources, while the decision of Persist-3 depends only on the most recent B = W + L − 1 observations. 

Remark J.1 (Finite memory versus cumulative SR detection) . Persist-3 discards observations older than B steps, whereas SR-DKW keeps a cumulative state unless it is truncated or reset. This structural difference is not a power advantage: under matched long-horizon calibration, SR-DKW attains higher KU detection with comparable observed alarm rates. Memory is also not the only difference between the two detectors, which additionally differ in the order of source aggregation and in the DKW adjustment. Thus, the cross-method gap should not be read as a memory effect on its own, and the within-family truncation ablation in Section 5.1 is the cleaner comparison. SR-DKW is preferred when sensitivity is the priority, while Persist-3 is preferred when the decision must depend only on recent observations. Rapid switching or interleaving of sources is not covered by the guarantees. 

Table 11: Which detector to use.                      

> Requirement Prefer Reason Maximize KU detection SR-DKW Weak evidence accumulates over long histories Decision depends only on recent observations Persist-3 Decision uses the last Bobserva-tions only Remove the effect of the old source from the continued decision after a switch Persist-3 Removed after B=W+L−1 new observations Rapid switching or interleaving of sources Neither by default Not covered by the guarantees

# K Data 

The eleven attack sources are ADC (Hu et al., 2024), AutoDAN-Turbo (Liu et al., 2025), Direct Request (Mazeika et al., 2024), Distribution Jailbreak (Fu et al., 2026), FlipAttack (Liu et al., 2024a), GCG (Zou et al., 2023), Human Jailbreaks (Shen et al., 2024), Jailbreak-Zero (Hu et al., 36 2026), PAIR (Chao et al., 2025), SimBAja (Takemoto, 2024), and TAP (Mehrotra et al., 2024). The benchmarks contain harmful requests and jailbreak prompts. We use only victim-model representations and binary jailbreak labels, and the paper does not display any harmful prompt or response. A configuration is a combination of dataset, victim model, held-out source, and seed. For the source-detection experiments (Sections 5.1 and 5.2 and Appendices A, H, and I), we ran 67 leave-one-source-out jobs over 5 seeds, giving 335 configurations; the 5 configurations for AdvBench, Gemma, and held-out Distribution Jailbreak failed, which leaves 330 configurations. Table 12 lists them by dataset and victim model. The layered evaluation of Section 5.3 uses a separate registry of 50 configurations (Appendix L). Table 12: Number of completed configurations in the source-detection experiments, by dataset and victim model.                    

> Dataset Victim model Configurations AdvBench Llama-2 55 AdvBench Qwen 50 AdvBench Gemma 50 AdvBench Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 55 HarmBench Llama-2 30 HarmBench Qwen 30 HarmBench Gemma 30 HarmBench Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 30 Total 330

The held-out source contributes no training, calibration, or validation data and appears only in the test streams. Under the short-horizon protocol, test streams sample 40 observations per segment from the test pool without replacement within a stream; the same prompt may appear in different streams. Confidence intervals for the original split use a bootstrap over held-out sources with 5000 replicates (seed 11). The original split was designed after earlier KU results had been seen, so its evaluation is exploratory. The robustness resplit (Appendix A) uses the same selection rule, which gives bτ = 2 .374, and contains 2425 stationary, 17040 KK, and 2425 KU streams, with no failed runs. The two evaluations are never pooled. 

# L Layered Intervention Details 

This section documents the layered evaluation of Section 5.3. All numerical values in this section are the reported frozen-threshold snapshot; no recalibration under a common validation protocol is reported. 

L.1 Evaluation registry and data lineage 

The evaluation replays cached victim-model representations and original outcome labels on aligned streams. That is, the guardrail decision Gt, the monitor statistics, and the label Yt refer to the same prompt occurrence. 

Configurations. All 50 configurations are AdvBench with the victim model Llama-2-7B-chat, indexed by held-out source and seed over seeds {0, 7, 11 , 23 , 42 } and the ten held-out sources ADC, 37 AutoDAN-Turbo, Direct Request, Distribution Jailbreak, FlipAttack, GCG, Human Jailbreaks, Jailbreak-Zero, PAIR and SimBAja. The number of known sources is K = 7 on 35 configurations and 

K = 8 on 15 (Direct Request, Distribution Jailbreak and Human Jailbreaks, at all five seeds). They were selected by a gated first pass of six seed-11 configurations (ADC, AutoDAN-Turbo, FlipAttack, GCG, PAIR, SimBAja), which had to be complete, followed by expansion in lexicographic order over the remaining (held-out, seed) pairs until 50 complete caches were reached; TAP is next in that order and was never reached, so it does not appear. Configurations without a complete cache were skipped, and no complete configuration was dropped for an unfavorable KU outcome. This scope is narrower than the four-model source-detection study of Sections 5.1 and 5.2. 

Streams. Streams are built with the same constructor as the source-detection study, with pre-switch segment length neach = 40 in all 50 configurations. The run contains 365 stationary streams of length 40 with no switch, 2310 KK streams of length 80 covering every ordered pair of distinct known sources, and 365 KU streams of length 80, one per known source into the held-out source. Each KK and KU stream has 40 pre-switch observations, so in the one-based indexing of Section 3.1, where ν is the position of the first observation from the new source, the switch is at ν = 41; the saved runs record it as the change point cp = 40, the number of pre-switch observations. We use cp only when quoting saved quantities and ν everywhere else. Stream counts vary by configuration with K; the totals above are the realized 50-configuration sums. Test identifiers are drawn without replacement within a stream but independently across streams, so the same test prompt can appear in many streams. 

The 1,729 denominator. The figure 1,729 counts aligned KU-stream positions whose jailbreak label is 1, summed over the 50 configurations, with a per-configuration range of 18 to 77. It counts prompt occurrences, not distinct prompt identifiers, and includes pre-switch known-source successes. The number of distinct prompts behind it is unresolved: per-position sample identifiers were not persisted in the saved result files. 

Alignment. For each KU stream position, we match the guardrail decision, the monitor statistic, and the jailbreak label by the attack method and the behavior index of the prompt. The guardrail decisions come from the saved MTK and Prompt Guard 2 predictions, and the labels come from the cached jailbreak-success records. All 29,200 KU stream positions have both guardrail decisions, so no position is dropped. Note that this check does not verify the label quality or the uniqueness of prompts. 

Data overlap. The evaluation reuses the AdvBench and Llama-2-7B-chat subset of the original split, with seeds {0, 7, 11 , 23 , 42 }. Thus, it is not an independent data collection. The Self-Risk control uses the same 50 configurations without reselection. In addition, the replay keeps all cached observations, including those on which the guardrail intervened. Thus, unlike a live system, the monitor can still observe a request after the guardrail has blocked it. 

L.2 Policy, activation timing, and estimands 

The combined action is I(G+M ) 

> t

= Gt ∨ A(M ) 

> t

with A(M ) 

> t

= I{t ≥ T (M )act } (Section 3.6). Escalation activates at the alarm itself, so T (M )act = Talarm and the alarmed prompt is itself escalated. If the monitor alarms before the KU switch, escalation stays on for every later position, including the whole post-switch suffix; such episodes are included in the KU intervention and extra-block metrics, 38 but they are not counted as KU detections, which require a first alarm after the change point. An escalated prompt is counted as intercepted. This assumes that escalation prevents the harmful response, and it does not test a human review service. In addition, later prompts, representations, and labels stay those of the cached stream after the escalation. Thus, the replay does not model an attacker who reacts to the intervention. For configuration c, the evaluation index set Ec contains every aligned KU-stream position whose jailbreak label is 1, both before and after the switch. It is the whole KU episode, not the post-switch part alone, and not the subset of successes left unblocked by the guardrail, which is only the numerator of the increment below. The blocking rate and its increment are 

Bc(G + M ) = 

P 

> i∈E c

YiI(G+M )

> i

P 

> i∈E c

Yi

, ∆Bc = Bc(G + M ) − Bc(G) = 

P 

> i∈E c

Yi(1 − Gi)A(M )

> i

P 

> i∈E c

Yi

,

where the second equality holds because the action is exactly G ∨ A. Every term in that numerator is nonnegative, so ∆ Bc ≥ 0 by construction: under a monotone OR policy, adding any trigger can only add interceptions, never remove them. A positive ∆ B therefore shows that the trigger fires on streams that still contain successful attacks, which is an operationally meaningful quantity, but it cannot by itself show that a source-aware trigger is more valuable than any other trigger with the same alarm budget. The comparison that would show this is to recalibrate Persist-3, SR-DKW, and Self-Risk on the same known-source validation streams, under the same alarm caps and the same escalation policy, freeze them, and only then evaluate KU streams. That experiment is not reported here, and the Self-Risk control in Appendix L.4 does not substitute for it because its calibration differs (Appendix L.3). The reported macro estimator is ∆Bmacro = X

> c∈C +

wc ∆Bc, X

> c∈C +

wc = 1 ,

where C+ is the set of configurations with a nonzero success denominator. The weights are uniform over configurations, wc = 1 /50; the macro estimator is not weighted by the 1,729 occurrences or by the number of known sources. For an intervention domain Dc, such as the prompts of the KU streams, the intervention increment is ∆Ic = 1

|D c|

X

> i∈D c

 I(G+M ) 

> i

− Gi

.

The pooled yield is 100 Nextra ,successful /N extra ,intervened , with numerator and denominator taken from the same domain; a zero denominator is reported as N/A, not as zero. Known-source attack traffic in this evaluation is attack traffic, not benign traffic, so the burdens below are not false positive rates on benign users. 

L.3 Frozen operating points and validation audit 

Table 13 reports the alarm rates of each trigger on the present known-source validation streams. These are trigger alarm rates, not intervention rates of the combined system: MTK and PG2 may already intervene on known-source streams, which is not a false alarm of the trigger. Self-Risk is calibrated on these streams under the two caps of 0 .05, whereas the thresholds of Persist-3 and SR-DKW are inherited from earlier experiments. The KK validation alarm rate of 0 .103 for Persist-3 therefore exceeds the cap imposed on Self-Risk, and the comparison in Section 5.3 is not budget-matched. 39 Table 13: Validation audit of the triggers in the layered evaluation. “Known-stream alarm” is the fraction of validation streams from a single known source with a trigger alarm; “KK-stream alarm” is the same fraction for validation streams with a known-to-known switch.                

> Trigger Known-stream alarm KK-stream alarm Threshold Self-Risk, MTK 0.0015 0.000 0.310 Self-Risk, PG2 0.0009 0.001 0.998 Persist-3 (inherited) 0.006 0.103 2.386 SR-DKW (inherited) 0.047 0.003 19.701

L.4 Self-Risk control 

The Self-Risk control uses the guardrail’s own risk score, rMTK  

> t

= −mtk score t for MTK and 

rPG2  

> t

= pg2 prob malicious t for PG2. It averages rt over the most recent W = 10 observations and alarms after L = 3 consecutive threshold crossings, as in Persist-3; it uses neither source-wise conformal evidence nor held-out KU outcomes. During startup it averages over the available prefix, 

mt = min( W, t ), with no burn-in period, and the persistence rule leaves the statistic undefined until three observations have arrived, so the earliest possible alarm is at t = 3. MTK Self-Risk makes no additional successful interception and no additional KU prompt intervention, so its yield is N/A. PG2 Self-Risk makes two additional KU prompt interventions and no additional successful interception, so its yield is zero. Because of the calibration mismatch in Table 13, this result does not rule out that a differently calibrated temporal escalation rule would also add protection. 

L.5 Paired results and uncertainty 

Table 14 reports pooled counts. The pooled fraction and the macro average differ: for example, 163 /1729 ≈ 0.094 for MTK+Persist-3, whereas the macro-averaged gain in Table 2 is 0 .074, because the pooled ratio weights every successful occurrence equally while the macro average weights configurations by wc. The reported intervals are 95% percentile clustered-bootstrap intervals with 5000 replicates and seed 11, resampling the ten held-out attack sources as clusters and keeping all configurations of a source together. For the difference between the two monitors, the per-configuration values of the SR-DKW minus Persist-3 extra-block gain give a macro point estimate of 0 .026 for both MTK and PG2, but no interval was computed for that paired difference, so we make no paired significance claim. The separate intervals against the guardrail alone overlap (for MTK, 0 .074 [0 .033 , 0.118] versus 0 .100 [0 .041 , 0.161]) and do not establish a difference between the monitors. The intervention sets of the two monitors are not assumed to be nested. 40 Table 14: Pooled counts in the layered evaluation. “Intercepted” is the number of originally successful attack occurrences intercepted by the system, out of 1,729; “Additional” is the increase relative to the guardrail alone; “Extra KU interventions” is the number of additional prompt interventions in streams with a known-to-unknown switch; “Yield” is additional successful interceptions per 100 extra KU interventions.                             

> System Intercepted Additional Extra KU interventions Yield MTK 682 00N/A MTK + Persist-3 845 163 2,240 7.28 MTK + SR-DKW 915 233 3,043 7.66 PG2 501 00N/A PG2 + Persist-3 682 181 3,403 5.32 PG2 + SR-DKW 764 263 4,513 5.83

The KU detection rates of the monitors in this evaluation are 0 .640 for Persist-3 and 0 .851 for SR-DKW; they are computed on the layered streams and are not comparable to Table 1. 

L.6 Historical standalone evaluation 

An earlier version of this paper compared Persist-3 with prompt-level defenses as standalone policies. That evaluation used a different protocol: AdvBench with Llama-2, 5720 prompts, 301 successful attack prompts, 940 streams, 55 leave-one-source-out configurations, and five seeds. After the first alarm, all remaining prompts in the stream are escalated. We keep it here for completeness. It is not an independent confirmation of Section 5.3, and it is not the baseline of the layered gains in Table 2. Table 15: Historical standalone comparison (55 configurations). Conditional defense success is the fraction of previously successful attack prompts blocked by the intervention policy; it is not residual ASR or an ASR reduction. Episode intervention is the fraction of streams containing an unseen source in which the policy intervenes. First intervention is the median position of the first intervention. Known burden and KK burden are the fractions of streams from a single known source and of KK streams, respectively, in which the policy intervenes.                     

> Method Conditional defense success Episode intervention First intervention Known burden KK burden Persist-3 0.675 0.875 31 0.009 0.124 MTK 0.410 1.000 10.708 0.708 Prompt Guard 2 0.304 1.000 20.458 0.458

There are two observations. First, as standalone policies, Persist-3 blocks a larger fraction of previously successful attack prompts than MTK and Prompt Guard 2 (0 .675 versus 0 .410 and 0 .304) and intervenes less often on streams from a single known source (0 .009 versus 0 .708 and 0 .458). Second, it acts much later (median first intervention at position 31, versus 1 and 2), and its KK burden of 0 .124 is non-negligible. The known burdens concern attack streams from known sources, not benign users, so this comparison does not establish that Persist-3 can replace a guardrail or that it has a low burden on benign traffic. We also compared Persist-3 with the historical defense single-crossing OUT-WIN , an earlier detector used in this evaluation. It uses the same statistic Cfam  

> t

, but a separate split of the defense data, a threshold τk set per configuration at the 99th percentile of validation values, a strict crossing rule Cfam  

> t

> τ k, and the same escalation policy after the alarm. Relative to it, Persist-3 41 increases conditional defense success by 0 .234 [0 .060 , 0.489] and changes the known burden by −0.056 [−0.070 , −0.044], but increases the KK burden by 0 .100 [0 .068 , 0.119]. Thus, Persist-3 improves defense success and reduces interventions on known sources, but not every intervention burden. 42