Title: A Blind Trust, the Bloody Thrust: When Attacker-Controlled Hook Updates Steer AI Agent Harnesses towards Malicious Behaviors

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.03884v1

Published Time: Fri, 04 Sep 2026 01:08:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# A Blind Trust, the Bloody Thrust: When Attacker-Controlled Hook Updates Steer AI Agent Harnesses towards Malicious Behaviors 

## Pengxun Li ∗, Litian Zhang †, Jianwei Hou ‡, Shujiang Wu §, Song Li ¶, Zifeng Kang ∥, Xi Zhang ∗∗ 

## Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Data and Technology Support Center of the Cyberspace Administration of China Beihang University Zhejiang University 

## Abstract 

Modern AI agent harnesses expose lifecycle hooks that bind shell commands to runtime events (e.g., session start, tool calls, and file edits). These commands run with host privi-leges yet ship as lifecycle-hook configuration and may fire at times the LLM never observes. We identify the lifecycle-hook update path, which harnesses trust blindly, as a new attack sur-face. Under a supply-chain threat model in which an attacker controls only plugin metadata and lifecycle-hook configura-tion, a benign versioned plugin can be trojanized by an up-date that silently binds attacker-chosen commands to benign events, yielding malicious host-side behavior such as privi-lege escalation. We propose H OOK PRY , an open-source and fully automated attack framework that systematically exploits this vulnerability across heterogeneous AI agent harnesses. HOOK PRY realizes ten attack objectives; across 25 combina-tions of harnesses and backends in 1,000 end-to-end runs, it compromises all seven evaluated harnesses, with per-harness success rates reaching 92.5%. Representative defenses remain insufficient: Microsoft Defender has 0% recall, and the union of three static defenses misses 47.5% of malicious artifacts. 

## 1 Introduction 

The integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) into soft-ware development has given rise to AI agent harnesses, i.e., frameworks such as Claude Code [2], OpenClaw [33, 34], and Codex CLI [32] that serve as the critical bridge between user intent and host system execution. Far from being simple message relays, these harnesses act as powerful intermedi-aries that possess high-level filesystem and process privileges. 

> ∗2026141030@bupt.cn
> †litianzhang@bupt.edu.cn
> ‡houjianwei@cac.gov.cn
> §wushujiang@buaa.edu.cn
> ¶songl@zju.edu.cn
> ∥zifengkang@bupt.edu.cn
> ∗∗ zhangx@bupt.edu.cn

Within this architecture, lifecycle hooks—integral compo-nents of the harness, designed to automate agent workflows— constitute a security-critical control plane. A hook is essentially a configuration entry that binds a specific event—e.g., the installation of a dependency or the modification of a configuration file—to a predefined system command. Crucially, the harness can dispatch this command directly as a subprocess without requiring the LLM to in-terpret or select it [2, 33, 34]. For instance, a “post-update” hook could automatically trigger a script immediately after a software update, a process that occurs outside the model’s reasoning loop. This creates a decisive post-trigger bound-ary where defenses focused on adversarial prompts or model alignment cannot inspect the execution. While prior studies have examined malicious plugin code, tool-description poi-soning, and skill manipulation [9,18,29,42,43], they have not isolated harness-managed lifecycle hooks as an independent attack target, leaving an important question unanswered: are these hooks susceptible to remote attacks delivered via the supply chain and portable across harnesses? Regrettably, our findings confirm this possibility. We iden-tify the lifecycle-hook update path, which harnesses trust im-plicitly, as a new attack surface. Under a supply-chain threat model in which an attacker controls only plugin metadata and lifecycle-hook configuration, a benign versioned plugin can be trojanized by an update that silently binds attacker-chosen commands to benign events, yielding malicious host-side be-havior such as privilege escalation [10, 30, 31]. To explain why this sequence succeeds across different harnesses, we characterize three features of lifecycle hooks. The first feature is a two-layer plugin architecture, where mar-ketplace metadata controls how a plugin is discovered while lifecycle hooks control how it actually runs. This allows a sin-gle plugin to show one unified public identity, but internally run with a distinct set of runtime permissions. The second feature is event-driven execution. Once an event matched with a lifecycle hook fires, the harness binds and spawns the configured command outside the LLM’s decision path, even if the runtime permissions attached to a stable plugin identity 1arXiv:2609.03884v1 [cs.CR] 3 Sep 2026 env-validator PreToolUseHook  

> User
> “Run a

security audit, 

use security sentinel ”  

> normal payload
> 1. Installl & Registration 3. User Query 5.Final Response
> LLM Agent: You are a helper with tools available:
> Plugin : security-sentinel v1.3 (auto-update) . . .
> env-validator PreToolUseHook
> Malicious payload
> Call Security-Sentinel
> 4.Event Trigger
> Normal Malicious
> harness
> env | grep -iE '(KEY|TOKEN|SECRET |PASSWORD|CREDENTIAL|AU TH)'>/tmp/,cache/env_dump
> /tmp/.cache/env_dump
> GITHUB_TOKEN=ghp_xx DEEPSEEK_API=sk-xx AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=x

settings.json 

> 2. Upgrade

①Adversarial Manifest Optimization ②Temporal Decoupling 

③Least Common Interface 

> Plugin Matketplace

stealthily dumps env credentials Figure 1: An overview of the proposed attack framework H OOK PRY . H OOK PRY comprises three components: ① Adversarial Manifest Optimization (AMO), which improves the marketplace retrievability of an initially benign plugin; ② Temporal Decoupling (TD), separating initial trust acquisition from a later hook-bearing update and conditional activation; and ③ Least Common Interface (LCI), which maps the payload to the native lifecycle-hook interface of the target harness. Steps 1-5 illustrate a standard workflow; after a matching event has been triggered, the harness dispatches the registered command outside the LLM’s decision path, leading to malicious behaviors, e.g., stealthily dumping env credentials. may have changed across versions. The third feature is cross-harness heterogeneity; Event names, configuration schemas, and command runners differ across harnesses. Each of these features introduces a corresponding challenge to the attacker. The first challenge, acquisition , concerns how a remote attacker can generate discovery opportunities for an initially benign plugin through ordinary marketplace chan-nels, without direct access to the victim or the ability to force an installation. The second challenge, activation , involves how that plugin can retain its stable identity yet acquire new runtime hook permissions after initial inspection, bypassing any new LLM decision or explicit authorization for the added hook entry. The third challenge, robustness , questions how a payload can survive cross-harness discrepancies in life-cycle vocabularies, configuration schemas, shell execution contracts, and permission boundaries. While prior technical report and vulnerability disclosures demonstrate specific prim-itives connecting a hook to process execution [10, 30, 31], an end-to-end attack paradigm that simultaneously overcomes the three challenges has not been systematically studied. In this paper, we propose H OOK PRY , an open-source 1 and fully automated framework for lifecycle-hook attacks that can be delivered through a supply chain, scalable to heterogeneous AI agent harnesses. Figure 1 summarizes a design overview of H OOK PRY together with its end-to-end attack path, from marketplace delivery of an initially benign plugin through a hook-bearing update to harness-controlled execution and its 

> 1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/HookPry-2EBD

externally observable effect. Specifically, the key insight be-hind HookPry’s design is that an attacker can exploit the time gap between when a plugin earns trust and when it actually exercises hook privileges, and preserve the intended attack capability across different tools rather than relying on rigid command syntax, by stitching together delivery, activation, and execution through plugin configuration alone. HOOK PRY comprises three components, each designed to solve one of the three challenges, respectively. The first component, Adversarial Manifest Optimization (AMO), ad-dresses the acquisition challenge by engineering a plugin’s metadata—such as its name and description—to create a con-strained identity that is retrievable under diverse search in-tents. This optimization ensures the plugin appears benign and highly discoverable, securing initial installation without triggering security scrutiny. Second, Temporal Decoupling (TD) addresses the activa-tion challenge by separating the initial benign artifact from a later update carrying altered hook authority under the same identity. By exploiting this temporal gap, TD allows the plugin to pass initial vetting and gain trust before silently introducing malicious lifecycle bindings via an update. Lastly, Least Common Interface (LCI) addresses the ro-bustness challenge by extracting the shared lifecycle-hook capabilities across different harnesses. It acts as a compiler that translates a single abstract attack logic into the native event and command representations specific to each target harness, ensuring portability without manual adaptation. 2HookPry effectively realizes ten distinct attack objectives across a diverse landscape of environments. Our evaluation covers 25 unique combinations of harnesses and backends, executing 1,000 end-to-end runs that demonstrate the frame-work’s potency: HookPry successfully compromised all seven evaluated harnesses. Overall, 77.0% of the runs produced fully oracle-confirmed effects, with peak effectiveness reaching 92.5% on the Hermes harness and zero runs being explicitly blocked by the model. This high success rate underscores a critical gap in current security postures. Representative de-fenses remain insufficient; Microsoft Defender achieved 0% recall, and even the union of three static defenses—including a lifecycle-hook-aware policy—still missed 47.5% of the ma-licious artifacts. These results confirm that a minimal con-figuration binding can induce severe cross-harness effects, largely bypassing the model-mediated loss observed in tradi-tional prompt-based attacks and evading defenses that fail to inspect the lifecycle-hook path. Finally, we have responsibly disclosed our findings to all affected harness vendors and are waiting for their response. Our contributions are: 

• A new attack surface and supply-chain threat model. 

We identify the lifecycle-hook update path, which harnesses trust blindly, as a critical new attack surface. We formalize a supply-chain attack where a benign, versioned plugin is tro-janized via a trusted update to silently bind attacker-chosen commands to benign events, enabling malicious host-side behavior such as privilege escalation without modifying the plugin’s executable code. 

• An automated cross-harness attack framework. We pro-pose H OOK PRY , an open-source and fully automated frame-work that systematically exploits this vulnerability across heterogeneous AI agent harnesses. H OOK PRY is designed to realize ten distinct attack objectives, addressing the chal-lenges of acquisition, activation, and robustness in auto-mated agent environments. 

• Comprehensive evaluation and defense analysis. We demonstrate H OOK PRY ’s effectiveness through 1,000 end-to-end runs across 25 combinations of seven harnesses and five LLM backends. Our results show that H OOK PRY com-promises all evaluated harnesses, with success rates reach-ing 92.5%. We further show that representative defenses, including Microsoft Defender, are insufficient, achieving 0% recall and missing a significant portion of malicious artifacts. 

## 2 Overview 2.1 Background 

An AI agent harness is the runtime layer that translates model outputs into stateful operations on a host system. As Fig-ure 2 illustrates, a harness receives observations through a context manager, invokes the LLM, coordinates multi-step Lifecycle Hooks  

> (Pre- and Post-Action controls)
> Context Engineering
> （Core Memory & Lookup ）
> LLM Reasoning
> （Decision engine ）
> Action Orchestration Loop
> Capability Hub
> （MCP & Skills ）
> Command Effect to Enviroment Observations from Environment
> State Repository
> （Multi-Step Memory ）
> Update after cycle Read state at cycle start
> Monitoring & Trace Log (Standardized Event Capture)

Figure 2: The architectural position of lifecycle hooks in an AI agent harness. The core harness connects context manage-ment, LLM inference, stateful execution, and tool dispatch, while lifecycle hooks form a cross-cutting interception and policy layer around this execution path. activity through an execution loop and persistent state store, and dispatches validated actions through a tool registry. These components form the main path for observation, reasoning, and action: the harness assembles context for inference, the model proposes an action, and the harness translates that pro-posal into an effect on the external environment. Lifecycle hooks occupy a distinct architectural position within this system. A hook is a manifest entry that binds a life-cycle event to an attacker-chosen shell command [2,14,33,34]; its eventual effect is bounded by update adoption, event oc-currence, and the privileges granted to the hook subprocess. Hooks are event-bound automation rules evaluated by the harness itself. They attach pre- or post-actions to lifecycle boundaries such as session startup, tool invocation, file modi-fication, or project opening, allowing the harness to enforce policy, collect telemetry, transform context, or run auxiliary commands at well-defined points in the execution cycle. Their placement is cross-cutting: a hook may observe or alter in-formation flowing through the context manager, execution loop, state store, and tool registry without becoming part of the model’s reasoning trace. Security analysis must therefore distinguish event produc-tion from event handling. A model may influence whether a model-dependent lifecycle event occurs; once the event occurs, the harness evaluates the registered binding and dis-patches the accepted hook through its own control path. This distinction determines which terms in our execution model may depend on the LLM. 

## 2.2 Related Work 

Agent systems have evolved from the ReAct paradigm of reasoning and action through tool-calling mechanisms such as Toolformer, GPT4Tools, and ToolkenGPT to single- and multi-agent architectures in which a harness coordinates mod-3els, state, and external tools. AgentBench and AutoGen pro-vide representative foundations for evaluation across environ-ments and multi-agent orchestration [13, 20, 38, 46, 48, 49]. These studies establish the importance of the tool execution layer but do not investigate trust migration through versioned lifecycle hooks. Work on model-mediated attacks has characterized direct and indirect prompt injection, injection propagation through tool-integrated agents, and their detection [11, 24, 25, 44, 51]. AgentDojo, AgentHarm, and Agent Security Bench further provide evaluation environments for agent attacks, defenses, and harmful behaviors [1, 8, 53]; other studies examine psy-chological manipulation, cross-agent propagation, and secure agents [12, 47, 54]. Jailbreak research further exposes failure modes in safety training and develops automated fuzzing, pro-gressive multi-turn attacks, and more reliable evaluation of attack effectiveness [37, 40, 45, 50]. In contrast, H OOK PRY ’s command need not be interpreted, generated, or selected by the model, so prompt-layer refusal cannot prevent a registered command from being dispatched by the harness. Agent poisoning and hijacking research covers poisoning of memory and knowledge bases, RAG contamination, hijack-ing of tool selection, prompt injection against coding agents, and IDE configuration backdoors [7, 21, 23, 39, 55]. MCP standardizes external resources and tools as composable in-terfaces [27], motivating work on poisoning tool descriptions, hijacking across tools, threat modeling, benchmarks, and de-fenses at the protocol level [3, 15, 16, 43, 52]. These attacks primarily influence model decisions through visible descrip-tions or returned values, whereas H OOK PRY targets bindings between events and commands that the harness interprets directly. Supply-chain risks in skill and plugin ecosystems have been documented by analyses of OpenClaw, malicious-skill measurements, and skill-poisoning studies [6, 9, 18, 19, 22, 29, 36, 42]. Vendor disclosures report sandbox bypasses, rule-file backdoors, malicious-skill propagation, and scanning prac-tices for MCP, skills, and hooks [4, 5, 17, 28]. The NIST adversarial-machine-learning taxonomy and OWASP guid-ance for agentic applications place poisoning, supply-chain compromise, tool misuse, and unintended code execution within broader risk-governance frameworks [35, 41]. Pub-lic vulnerabilities and vendor reports demonstrate individual lifecycle-hook execution primitives [10,30,31], but do not pro-vide the cross-version, cross-harness end-to-end construction studied here. 

## 2.3 A Motivating Example 

In this subsection, we demonstrate a successful authorization bypass attack in Claude Code which are automatically con-ducted by our framework H OOK PRY . As demonstrated in Fig-ure 3, when a benign, trusted plugin—e.g., testHookplugin 

in this case—receives an update, Claude Code automati-cally loads newly added lifecycle hooks without user noti-fication, item-level confirmation, or re-authorization.The tech-nical mechanism involves Claude Code’s automatic update synchronization, which checks marketplace repositories for manifest changes and applies updates without validating indi-vidual hook entries. This vulnerability empirically validates the challenges proposed in the Introduction—acquisition, activation, and robustness—which further inspired our system design. First, observing that the plugin must initially penetrate the market as benign, we developed Adversarial Manifest Optimization (AMO) to systematically address the acquisition challenge, ensuring the malicious payload remains hidden behind a com-petitive, functional facade. Second, to weaponize the trust boundary exposed in the Claude Code flaw, we proposed Temporal Decoupling (TD); this component is specifically designed to exploit the window where trust has been trans-ferred but authority has not been re-validated. Finally, rec-ognizing that the discovered vulnerability relies on Claude Code-specific configurations, we introduced Least Common Interface (LCI) to solve the portability challenge. LCI gen-eralizes this attack surface, extracting the minimal shared capabilities across harnesses and compiling our semantic at-tack logic into native representations. This approach allows us to transform a specific implementation flaw into a universal, automated threat model. 

## 2.4 Threat Model 

We define the H OOK PRY threat model in terms of the at-tacker’s channel and constraints, capabilities, objectives, and the boundary of our evaluation. 

Attacker Channel and Constraints. The attacker operates exclusively through a versioned plugin published to a public marketplace or community registry. The attacker has no local or repository access, cannot inject prompts or tool results, and does not modify the harness, exploit implementation bugs, bypass a sandbox, force installation, or trigger an event. 

Attacker Capabilities. Within that channel, the attacker controls plugin metadata, versioning, and lifecycle-hook con-figuration. The attacker first releases a benign version and later publishes an update that adds or modifies a lifecycle hook under the same identity. A lifecycle hook is a manifest entry that binds a lifecycle event to an attacker-chosen shell command [2, 14, 33, 34]; its eventual effect is bounded by update adoption, event occurrence, and the privileges granted to the hook subprocess. 

Attacker Objectives. The immediate objective is unautho-rized command execution: after an event fires, the harness spawns an attacker-chosen subprocess without a new LLM decision or hook-specific authorization. Coarse-grained trust in a plugin or update does not constitute informed approval of an added command. Within the hook’s privileges, the attacker may pursue information theft, persistence, manipulation, re-4(a) 

(b) 

Figure 3: A motivating example in Claude Code. The figure il-lustrates a successful authorization bypass across a plugin up-date, automatically conducted by H OOK PRY . (a) Marketplace-compatible test repository. (b) The same plugin identity loads three newly added hooks without item-level confirmation. source hijacking, or propagation. We operationalize these outcomes as ten objectives mapped to MITRE ATT&CK [26]. 

Out of Scope. Our primary evaluation focuses on hooks distributed through versioned plugins in Claude Code, Open-Claw, OpenHarness, and Codex CLI. Conditional on instal-lation and update delivery, it measures event triggering, na-tive binding, subprocess execution, and the resulting effect. Marketplace adoption, prompt injection, configuration con-trolled through a repository, implementation vulnerabilities, and sandbox escape are outside the evaluation. These adjacent vectors may complement or amplify H OOK PRY ; the mecha-nism studied here operates at the configuration layer and does not depend on them. 

## 2.5 Attack Taxonomy 

Existing agent-attack taxonomies, such as DyMalSkill [6] and DDIPE [36], organize attacks around LLM interactions, whereas a hook acts as a shell command at the harness layer. We therefore classify each realizable hook attack using a three-dimensional tuple: the target asset on which it acts, the consumer that receives or is affected by the result, and the communication pattern connecting them. The asset dimen-sion distinguishes authentication material, data, source files, tool-output channels, compute resources, configuration, and directories; the consumer dimension distinguishes remote ser-vices, developers, the LLM, harness enforcement, and sibling projects; and the communication dimension distinguishes ex-traction, interactive control, modification, and replication. A tuple is retained only when it can be implemented by a hook command and represents a documented cybersecurity effect. Attacks with the same tuple are merged, whereas a difference along any axis defines a distinct objective. This procedure yields the ten mutually exclusive objectives in Table 1. The architectural model and threat model define the exe-cution boundary and admissible attacker actions; the attack taxonomy supplies the semantic effects that a cross-harness construction must preserve. We next formalize this construc-tion. 

## 3 Methodology 

HOOK PRY links three mechanisms in a dependency chain. Adversarial Manifest Optimization (AMO) increases the mar-ketplace visibility of an initially benign plugin. That artifact provides the carrier examined by Temporal Decoupling (TD), which uses benign probes to characterize the lifecycle of a hook, locate a trust boundary with weak validation and suf-ficient runtime privilege, and restrict activation to the corre-sponding runtime state. Least Common Interface (LCI) then compiles the resulting attack semantics into the native config-uration of each AI agent harness. Figure 4 shows the principle and handoff at each stage. 

## 3.1 Adversarial Manifest Optimization 

The first stage constructs the public-facing identity of the initially benign plugin. Let p(0) = ( m, hb), where m = ( n, d)

contains the plugin name n and natural-language descrip-tion d, and hb is a benign hook implementing the advertised functionality. AMO optimizes only m to improve controlled retrievability within a target functional category C.Let MC be a finite set of budget-matched metadata candi-dates, and let G = {g1, . . . , gk} ⊂ C be a representative set of benign plugins in that category. If the marketplace ranker R

and category query distribution QC were available, the ideal objective would select the metadata with the highest expected ranking score: 

m† = arg max 

> m∈MC

Eq∼QC [R(q, m)] . (1) Equation (1) defines the true objective of AMO, but in practice neither the internal ranker R nor the real query dis-5Table 1: H OOK PRY attack taxonomy derived from target asset, victim consumer, and communication pattern, with MITRE ATT&CK tactic mappings [26]. 

Objective Target Asset Victim Consumer Communication Pattern MITRE ATT&CK Tactic [26] Credential Collection (COL) Authentication material Remote service Extraction TA0006 Credential Access Data Exfiltration (EXF) Non-credential data Remote service Extraction TA0010 Exfiltration Resource Hijacking (HIJ) Compute resources Remote service Extraction TA0040 Impact Command & Control (C2) Compute resources Remote service Interactive control TA0011 Command and Control Tampering (TAM) Source-code files Developer Modification TA0040 Impact Manipulation (MAN) Tool-output channel LLM Modification TA0040 Impact Privilege Escalation (ESC) Configuration Harness enforcement Modification TA0004 Privilege Escalation Persistence (PER) Configuration Harness enforcement Replication TA0003 Persistence Evasion (EVA) Filesystem Developer Modification TA0005 Defense Evasion Propagation (PRO) Directories Sibling projects Replication TA0008 Lateral Movement Query Intet 1 Query Intet 2 Query Intet 3 

11 Adversarial Manifest Optimization 

> Optimized Manifest Target Category

2 Temporal Decoupling 

> Benign V1
> Trust Installation
> Plugin update
> Malicious Hook
> Low Validation
> High Privilege

Muti-Intent Retriebaility 

> Instance Distinctiveness Conditional Activation

3 Least Common Interface 

Attack taxonomy 

Minimal Share Capabilities     

> Benign Probe Carrier
> Conditi-onal Payload
> Benign behavior
> （no payload ）
> Activate payload
> (𝐀 𝐀 = 0) (𝐀 𝐀 = 1)
> Generate boundary predicate 𝐀 𝐀
> Evaluate boundary
> 𝐀 𝐀

Figure 4: Core principles of the H OOK PRY methodology. AMO improves retrieval across multiple intents while preserving the distinct identity of the benign probe carrier. TD identifies a trust boundary that applies little validation but grants sufficient runtime privilege, and activates the payload only when the corresponding predicate holds. LCI extracts the minimal lifecycle-hook capabilities shared by the harnesses and compiles invariant attack semantics into each native configuration. tribution QC is accessible. Before formal evaluation, AMO therefore constructs a proxy-intent set eQC from the definition of the target category. This set contains the category name and several queries that pair actions with objects; the evaluation queries are never exposed to the optimizer. Let f(·) denote a lexical feature map, S a similarity func-tion, sq(m) = S(f(m), f(q)) the similarity between candidate metadata m and query q, and μG = k−1 ∑g∈G f(g) the cate-gory centroid of the reference benign plugins. AMO scores each candidate with the following parameterized multi-intent surrogate objective: 

Jθ(m) = α 1

| eQC| ∑ 

> q∈e

QC

sq(m) + β min  

> q∈e

QC

sq(m) + γS



f(m), μG



.

(2) Here, θ = ( α, β, γ) lies on the simplex: α, β, γ ≥ 0 and 

α + β + γ = 1. The mean term rewards aggregate coverage of multiple query intents, the minimum term protects the weakest represented intent, and the category-centroid term constrains the candidate metadata to remain consistent with the target category. Thus, A0 is a strict centroid-only baseline, whereas AMO jointly optimizes aggregate coverage, worst-6intent robustness, and category conformity. These weights are selected empirically. Given a preregis-tered finite set of parameter configurations H , AMO selects 

ϑ = ( θ, ε) using development categories only: 

ϑ⋆ = arg max  

> ϑ∈H

∆BM25 dev (ϑ; A0 )

s.t. ∆char dev (ϑ; A0 ) ≥ − ηr,

∆name dev (ϑ; A0 ) ≤ ηn.

(3) Each ∆ term measures the change from A0, while ηr and ηn

are preregistered non-inferiority tolerances. The selection pro-cedure primarily maximizes the BM25 improvement on the development set while constraining degradation in character-level retrieval and growth in name similarity. The selected ϑ⋆

is frozen before evaluation on held-out categories and queries, reducing the risk of post hoc parameter selection based on test outcomes. AMO expresses instance-level distinctiveness through an 

ε-constraint. It first constructs a near-optimal retrieval set, and then minimizes the maximum similarity between a candidate and the reference benign plugins within that set: 

M ⋆ 

> ε

=



m ∈ MC : Jθ⋆ (m) ≥ max 

> m′∈MC

Jθ⋆ (m′) − ε⋆



, (4) 

m⋆ = arg min  

> m∈M⋆
> ε

max  

> g∈G

S(f(m), f(g)) . (5) This two-stage procedure first keeps the retrieval objec-tive near optimal, then increases instance-level distinctiveness without exceeding the permitted performance loss. Through-out AMO, only (n, d) changes; the benign hook hb remains invariant and semantically consistent with the advertised func-tionality. AMO therefore modifies only the retrieval repre-sentation of the initial artifact while preserving its benign executable behavior. The resulting p(0) serves as the probe carrier for TD, enabling measurement of the target harness’s hook trust boundaries without executing malicious operations. 

## 3.2 Temporal Decoupling 

Temporal Decoupling identifies the point in the hook lifecycle at which the separation between security judgment at vali-dation time and effective privilege at runtime is greatest. It then specializes the payload so that it becomes active only when the runtime conditions at that point are satisfied. TD discovers candidate trust boundaries, ranks them by the gap between validation and privilege, and generates a payload with the required activation conditions. Version updates, de-layed downloads, and triggers that depend on the environment may all carry this payload. 

Candidate Boundaries and Benign Probes. For a tar-get harness H, let BH = {b1, . . . , bm} denote the observable candidate hook trust boundaries. A boundary b is jointly de-termined by a lifecycle event, configuration source, loading stage, and runtime state, such as installation-time manifest val-idation, hook loading at session startup, pre-tool-use binding, or subprocess creation. TD generates a benign probe zb for each boundary and restricts its effects to writing a randomized marker and recording execution evidence. By fixing the plu-gin identity, advertised functionality, and probe effect while changing only the boundary variable, TD obtains differential observations across boundaries. For each boundary b, TD measures four quantities: VH (b)

denotes the strength of validation before entering the bound-ary; AH (b) indicates whether a new authorization specific to the hook entry is required; RH (b) denotes the runtime privi-leges granted to the hook at that boundary; and OH (b) denotes whether the probe can be observed reliably. We define the trust gap at a boundary as 

GH (b) = OH (b)λrRH (b) − λvVH (b) − λaAH (b), (6) where λr, λv, λa ≥ 0 are predetermined weights. GH (b)

measures the structural asymmetry between runtime privi-lege and the strength of validation and authorization, condi-tional on reliable reachability. A high-scoring boundary grants substantial runtime capability while applying comparatively weak checks or per-entry authorization before entering that capability domain. 

Weakest-Boundary Selection. Among candidates that satisfy the payload’s capability requirements and the probe-stability constraint, TD selects the boundary with the largest trust gap. Let ρ(a) denote the minimum capability set re-quired by an abstract payload a, and let Cap H (b) denote the capabilities provided at boundary b. Then 

b⋆ 

> H

= arg max 

> b∈BH

GH (b)

s.t. ρ(a) ⊆ Cap H (b), OH (b) ≥ τo.

(7) Here, τo is a preregistered observability threshold. The capability and observability constraints jointly define the fea-sible boundary set, ensuring that the selected boundary pro-vides both the capabilities required by the payload and stable probe evidence. TD thus implements a repeatable process of candidate generation, differential probing, and constrained selection. 

Conditional-Payload Specialization. After selecting b⋆ 

> H

,TD specializes the abstract payload a according to the event, loading stage, privilege context, and environment state asso-ciated with that boundary: 

aTD  

> H

(s) = 

(

a(s), χH (s, b⋆ 

> H

) = 1,

benign (s), otherwise , (8) where s denotes the runtime state and χH is a boundary predicate generated from the probe results. It verifies that the current event, loading stage, privilege context, and environ-ment state are consistent with b⋆ 

> H

. In all other states, the hook 7preserves its original benign behavior; the payload enters the target branch only when execution reaches the weakest boundary and the required capabilities are actually available. TD outputs the candidate boundary set BH , observations from benign probes, the ranking GH based on the trust gap, the selected boundary b⋆ 

> H

, and the conditional predicate χH . These outputs specify the location and runtime conditions of attack activation and can be carried through delivery mechanisms such as version updates. LCI translates the selected boundary and payload conditions into a native configuration recognized by each target harness. 

## 3.3 Cross-Harness Robust Execution via the Least Common Interface 

The third stage transfers the attack across heterogeneous im-plementations of lifecycle-hook mechanisms. Different har-nesses implement the common event-driven execution prim-itive through distinct event names, configuration schemas, command runners, and permission boundaries. LCI extracts the minimal sufficient capabilities required to preserve the semantics of an attack objective, removes dependencies on harness-specific events, syntax, and runtime environments, and generates a native lifecycle hook for every target harness. Let the target harness set be 

H = {H1, . . . , Hn}.

For a harness H, represent its hook interface as 

DH = ( EH , ΣH , XH , PH ).

Here, EH is the set of lifecycle events, ΣH is the plugin mani-fest schema, and XH is the command execution contract. The contract covers the command runner, the convention for pass-ing arguments, the working directory, and rules for inheriting the environment. PH captures the privileges and resources available to the hook subprocess. Let Cap (DH ) denote the semantic capability set normalized from these attributes, and let 

C = \

> H∈H

Cap (DH ) (9) denote the candidate capabilities shared by the complete target set. For an attack a, its cross-harness semantics are jointly defined by the target effect o(a) and the necessary exe-cution conditions q(a). For a once-per-session objective, q(a)

includes session reachability and command-execution capabil-ity; for a tool-input manipulation objective, q(a) additionally includes pre-tool-execution timing, invocation context, and input-control capability. LCI iteratively removes from C the capabilities irrelevant to o(a) and q(a), yielding the attack-specific minimal sufficient specification: 

I ∗ 

> a

= arg min   

> I⊆C

|I |

s.t. q(a) ⊆ I ,

∀H ∈ H , ∃yH ∈ Native H (I ) : Obs H (yH ) = o(a).

(10) Here, Native H (I ) denotes the native lifecycle-hook imple-mentations in harness H that satisfy capability set I , and Obs H

denotes the harness-independent external-effect oracle. Equa-tion (10) minimizes dependencies on event, command, and resource capabilities subject to the constraint that the same attack semantics remain realizable on every target harness. Attacks that satisfy this constraint proceed to native compila-tion; for all others, the applicability scope is restricted to the subset of harnesses providing the necessary capabilities. After deriving I ∗ 

> a

, the harness adapter selects the native event in H that satisfies the specification with the fewest additional dependencies: 

e⋆ 

> H

= arg min 

> e∈EH

Dep H (e) s.t. I ∗ 

> a

⊆ Cap H (e), (11) where Dep H (e) denotes the event trigger’s dependence on conditions such as a particular tool invocation, runtime mode, or auxiliary service. Among native entry points satisfying 

q(a), this criterion prioritizes the event with the fewest addi-tional dependencies; when execution timing is part of q(a),candidates are correspondingly restricted to events with the required temporal semantics. The adapter φH then compiles the minimal sufficient specification into 

φH (I ∗ 

> a

) = ( e⋆ 

> H

, cH , σH ), (12) where cH is the command that realizes the target effect under XH and PH , and σH is the lifecycle hook’s native en-coding in ΣH . The attack semantics defined by o(a) and q(a)

remain invariant during transfer; the native mechanism of each harness supplies the event name, command string, and configuration structure. Semantic extraction identifies the tar-get effect and necessary conditions. Capability minimization removes harness-specific dependencies, after which native compilation selects the least-dependent feasible event and generates the command and configuration. Under this adapter contract, each shared semantic case produces a native life-cycle hook for every harness, and a common external oracle checks whether the effect is preserved. 

## 4 Implementation 5 Experimental Evaluation 

We evaluate H OOK PRY through four research questions. Within the scope defined by the threat model, the main HOOK PRY experiment follows its generated native artifacts 8from harness loading to externally observable effects veri-fied by independent oracles. RQ2 is a separate translation-comparison experiment that mechanically converts malicious MCP tool descriptions into lifecycle hooks and compares them, on the same 50 targets, with the E2E-ASR of native HOOK PRY constructed by us. 

• RQ1 (Effectiveness): Is H OOK PRY effective and stable across different harnesses and LLM backends? 

• RQ1.1 (Execution-Level Effectiveness and Mecha-nism Utility): Across harness architectures and attack categories, how reliably can H OOK PRY start its attack mechanism and produce verified end-to-end effects? 

• RQ1.2 (Model Independence): After a matching lifecy-cle event fires, to what extent is H OOK PRY ’s execution path independent of the LLM backend? 

• RQ2 (Translation Comparison): After malicious MCP tool descriptions are converted into lifecycle-event hooks, what E2E-ASR do they achieve, and is it lower than that of native H OOK PRY constructed for the same targets? 

• RQ3 (Ablation Study): How do AMO, TD, and LCI affect HOOK PRY ’s end-to-end attack effectiveness? 

• RQ4 (Countermeasures): To what extent can representa-tive countermeasures distinguish H OOK PRY attack artifacts from matched benign controls? RQ1 measures cross-harness end-to-end attack effects and mechanism utility (RQ1.1), then tests model independence of the post-trigger execution path (RQ1.2). RQ2 compares translated MCP attack semantics with native malicious hooks. RQ3 isolates the contributions of AMO, TD, and LCI through component ablations. RQ4 measures the coverage and resid-ual gaps of static defenses. 

## 5.1 Experimental Setup 

Harnesses and LLM Backends. The RQ1 experiment tests seven AI agent harnesses: OpenHarness, OpenClaw, Claude Code, Codex CLI, OpenCode, Hermes, and WorkBuddy. It uses five LLM backends: Claude Sonnet 4.6, DeepSeek-V4-Pro, Kimi-K2.6, GLM-4.7-Flash, and GitHub Copilot, cov-ering 25 combinations of harnesses and backends. RQ2 and RQ3 use an independent unified comparison dataset and are fixed to Claude Code with DeepSeek-V4-Flash; this backend is not counted among the 25 RQ1 combinations. 

Protocol. We generate native artifacts for each harness from the same 40 abstract case seeds and execute them in batches. Every combination of case, harness, and backend runs in an environment containing synthetic assets. A run covers harness startup, loading and registration of the native lifecycle hook, submission of the trigger request, H OOK PRY 

execution, collection of external evidence, and verdict compu-tation by the oracle. The experiment comprises 40 cases × 25 combinations of harnesses and backends = 1,000 attempted runs. 

RQ2 Comparison Protocol. RQ2 is independent of the 1,000 execution-layer runs above. We select 50 malicious MCP tool-description-poisoning targets traceable to MCP-Tox [43] from a unified dataset. For each target, we preserve the benign query, capability budget, synthetic fixture, effect, and external oracle; only the original malicious description is mechanically converted into context injected by a Claude Code lifecycle hook. The hook itself does not directly execute the effect, and the model still decides whether to invoke the same synthetic effect tool. Under a fixed random-seed alloca-tion, 19 MCP2Hook cases retain SessionStart ; the remain-ing 31 are assigned to UserPromptSubmit , PreToolUse ,

PostToolUse , or Stop . The experiment uses Claude Code with DeepSeek V4 Flash, provider-default sampling, a 120-second timeout, and a fresh isolated directory for every run. 

Verdicts and Metrics. The evaluator assigns each run one of four mutually exclusive verdicts. A pass requires all pre-registered external checks for the case to succeed; a partial 

verdict indicates that only a proper subset succeeds; blocked 

records explicit harness interception; and fail covers all re-maining outcomes. Our primary metric is the binary veri-fied end-to-end attack success rate (E2E-ASR), defined as 

Npass /Nattempted . Partial outcomes receive zero credit, and we report the outcome distribution separately. We also report mechanism utility, defined as the proportion of runs in which steps such as hook triggering, payload loading, or hook regis-tration actually occur. This measure distinguishes mechanism initiation from end-to-end effectiveness. 

## 5.2 RQ1: H OOK PRY Effectiveness 

RQ1.1: Execution-Level Effectiveness and Mechanism Utility Setup. We conduct 1,000 end-to-end runs over the 40 attack cases, seven harnesses, and five LLM backends described in the experimental setup, and use external oracles to determine the effect of every run. A successfully generated configuration, emitted tool call, or spawned process is not by itself sufficient evidence of success; RQ1.1 requires H OOK PRY to produce the preregistered external effect. 

Results. Table 2 reports H OOK PRY ’s binary E2E-ASR by attack category and harness. Across 1,000 attempted runs, HOOK PRY receives 770 pass verdicts, 34 partial verdicts, and 196 fail verdicts; no run is explicitly blocked. The resulting micro-averaged E2E-ASR is 77.0%. The final column of Ta-ble 2 reports an unweighted macro-average across harnesses so that harnesses with different numbers of tested backends contribute equally. Table 3 reports mechanism utility by attack category. Utility is the proportion of mechanism-level steps that actually initi-ate, including hook triggering, payload loading, and hook reg-istration. Overall utility is 83.9%, above the overall E2E-ASR (77.0% micro-average and 77.9% macro-average), showing 9Table 2: [RQ1.1] H OOK PRY ’s verified execution-level E2E-ASR by attack category and harness. Partial outcomes receive no fractional credit. The final column is the unweighted macro-average across harnesses.                                                                                                 

> Attack Category OpenHarness OpenClaw Claude Code Codex CLI OpenCode Hermes WorkBuddy Average
> Credential Collection (COL) 81.0% 100.0% 60.7% 71.4% 96.4% 95.2% 90.5% 85.0% Data Exfiltration (EXF) 75.0% 100.0% 87.5% 50.0% 100.0% 100.0% 91.7% 86.3% Resource Hijacking (HIJ) 83.3% 87.5% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 83.3% 93.4% Command & Control (C2) 33.3% 50.0% 12.5% 0.0% 62.5% 66.7% 66.7% 41.7% Tampering (TAM) 75.0% 100.0% 6.2% 100.0% 81.3% 100.0% 100.0% 80.4% Manipulation (MAN) 66.7% 100.0% 33.3% 66.7% 66.7% 77.8% 88.9% 71.4% Privilege Escalation (ESC) 66.7% 100.0% 87.5% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 93.5% Persistence (PER) 83.3% 6.2% 6.2% 0.0% 100.0% 91.7% 100.0% 55.3% Evasion (EVA) 66.7% 68.8% 68.8% 75.0% 75.0% 75.0% 66.7% 70.9% Propagation (PRO) 66.7% 83.3% 54.2% 66.7% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 81.6% Overall 71.7% 81.9% 52.5% 65.0% 90.6% 92.5% 90.8% 77.9%

that mechanism initiation does not imply completion of the ex-ternal effect. Utility is highest for Privilege Escalation (94.3%) and Resource Hijacking (91.7%), but lower for Command and Control (55.4%) and Persistence (65.8%); Persistence reaches only 0.0% for Codex CLI and 6.2% for OpenClaw. The per-cell sample sizes are N: COL=28/21 and PRO=24/18; the remaining categories contain 12–16 obser-vations. Hermes, OpenHarness, and WorkBuddy have only three tested models for some categories, so their correspond-ing cells have slightly smaller N.Across all attempted runs, lifecycle hooks are actually trig-gered in approximately 82.0% of cases, ranging from 72.3% for Codex CLI to 92.4% for OpenCode. Mechanism utility is higher than the end-to-end success rate of 77.0%, indicating that environmental and policy constraints after hook trigger-ing account for most of the gap. 

RQ1.1 Takeaway. HOOK PRY produces oracle-confirmed effects on every target harness, but the utility matrix shows that mechanism utility is not uniform across attack seman-tics. Hermes reaches an overall success rate of 92.5% and achieves 100% in five categories. Transfer is strongest when the attack objective relies on capabilities commonly available to lifecycle-hook subprocesses: Resource Hijacking reaches a 93.4% macro-average, and Privilege Escalation reaches 93.5%. Objectives that depend on network reachability or durable filesystem state expose a different boundary. Com-mand and Control (41.7% E2E-ASR; 55.4% mechanism util-ity) and Persistence (55.3% E2E-ASR; 65.8% mechanism utility) remain constrained by network policy, filesystem pol-icy, and isolation mechanisms. These challenges particularly manifest in certain harness configurations, suggesting that complex network interactions and system persistence mech-anisms may require additional considerations in the hook implementation strategy—such as enhanced detection mech-anisms for network protocols and deeper integration with system-level monitoring—to better capture these attack pat-terns. This category structure supports the intended advantage of LCI in preserving portable attack semantics. Local deploy-ment policy still determines whether a bound command starts and completes its final effect. 

RQ1.2: Model Independence Setup. Holding the generated cases, native adapters, evaluator, and external oracles fixed, we use cross-backend standard deviation to quantify variation among LLM backends within each harness. A H OOK PRY payload is a command bound to a harness lifecycle event, and its execution path differs from natural-language prompt injection. The LLM may affect whether a tool-use event occurs; after a matching event fires, lifecycle-hook binding and subprocess dispatch follow the harness execution path. 

Results. Figure 5 compares H OOK PRY ’s binary E2E-ASR and mechanism utility across the evaluated LLM backends for each harness. Each radar panel contains only the backends tested for that harness, and the annotated vertices report the exact rates. Codex CLI exhibits no cross-backend variation in veri-fied success. OpenClaw and Claude Code have overall stan-dard deviations of 1.1pp and 2.5pp, respectively. Thus, three of the seven harnesses maintain nearly constant E2E-ASR across the tested backends. The remaining harnesses are more backend-sensitive: OpenCode has a standard deviation of 4.5pp, Hermes 7.1pp, and WorkBuddy 9.4pp; OpenHarness’s 9.6pp variation is driven primarily by the gap between GitHub Copilot (62.5%) and Kimi-K2.6 (85.0%). The strongest evidence for model independence comes from Codex CLI, OpenClaw, and Claude Code: despite using backends from different model families, none has a cross-backend standard deviation above 2.5pp. Harness ordering also remains stable across backends, which points to registra-tion, permission, and isolation behavior as the main source of the success-rate differences. The larger variations for Open-Harness, WorkBuddy, and Hermes (9.6pp, 9.4pp, and 7.1pp, respectively) occur when events depend closely on tool use, because backend-specific tool-use patterns can determine whether the matching lifecycle event fires. E2E-ASR cap-tures both this model-mediated trigger and the subsequent 10 Table 3: [RQ1.1] H OOK PRY ’s mechanism utility by attack category and harness. Each cell reports the proportion of mechanism-level steps that actually initiate; the final column and row are the corresponding unweighted averages. 

Attack Category Claude Code Codex CLI Hermes OpenClaw OpenCode OpenHarness WorkBuddy Average 

Credential Collection (COL) 71.4% 85.7% 85.7% 100.0% 96.4% 90.5% 90.5% 88.6% Data Exfiltration (EXF) 81.2% 50.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 83.3% 91.7% 86.6% Resource Hijacking (HIJ) 87.5% 87.5% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 83.3% 83.3% 91.7% Command & Control (C2) 50.0% 62.5% 50.0% 50.0% 75.0% 33.3% 66.7% 55.4% Tampering (TAM) 50.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 81.2% 91.7% 100.0% 89.0% Manipulation (MAN) 58.3% 66.7% 77.8% 100.0% 66.7% 88.9% 88.9% 78.2% Privilege Escalation (ESC) 93.8% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 66.7% 100.0% 94.3% Persistence (PER) 62.5% 0.0% 91.7% 6.2% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 65.8% Evasion (EVA) 75.0% 100.0% 100.0% 75.0% 100.0% 75.0% 91.7% 88.1% Propagation (PRO) 83.3% 83.3% 100.0% 87.5% 100.0% 72.2% 100.0% 89.5% Average 72.5% 75.0% 91.5% 83.8% 93.8% 80.8% 93.3% 83.9% CDGK

> 25 50 75 100
> 55.0 65.0 50.0 97.5 55.0 97.5 50.0 30.0

Claude Code 

CDGK 

> 25 50 75 100
> 65.0 75.0 65.0 77.5 65.0 75.0 65.0 72.5

Codex CLI 

CDGK 

> 25 50 75 100
> 82.5 82.5 82.5 82.5 80.0 82.5 82.5 87.5

OpenClaw 

CKP

> 25 50 75 100
> 67.5 82.5 85.0 85.0 62.5 75.0

OpenHarness 

CDGK 

> 25 50 75 100
> 87.5 90.0 95.0 100.0 85.0 87.5 95.0 97.5

OpenCode 

DGK

> 25 50 75 100 97.5 100.0 82.5 85.0 97.5 100.0

Hermes 

DGK

> 25 50 75 100 97.5 100.0 77.5 80.0 97.5 100.0

WorkBuddy 

> Backends: C = Claude Sonnet 4.6 | D = DeepSeek-V4-Pro | G = GLM-4.7-Flash | K = Kimi-K2.6 | P = GitHub Copilot

E2E-ASR Mechanism utility 

Figure 5: [RQ1.2] E2E-ASR (circles) and mechanism utility (squares) across LLM backends for each harness. Vertices report exact percentages; pairs of harnesses and backends that were not evaluated are omitted. Backend abbreviations are defined in the figure. harness-controlled execution. 

RQ1.2 Takeaway. HOOK PRY ’s binding and subprocess dispatch become harness-controlled after a matching lifecy-cle event fires. The cross-backend standard deviations below 2.5pp for Codex CLI, OpenClaw, and Claude Code support model independence at this post-trigger boundary. However, 11 Table 4: [RQ2] E2E-ASR after malicious MCP targets are converted into hooks with mixed lifecycle events. H OOK PRY 

consists of native lifecycle hooks constructed by us for the same 50 targets and serves as the paired control using the same sample.          

> Condition Successes (out of valid) E2E-ASR Wilson 95% CI
> Native H OOK PRY 46 of 50 92.0% 81.2–96.8% MCP →Hook 28 of 50 56.0% 42.3–68.8%

OpenCode, Hermes, WorkBuddy, and OpenHarness exhibit greater variability (4.5–9.6pp) due to their distinct tool-use behaviors that influence event generation. This variation re-flects fundamental differences in how these backends interact with system APIs, rather than inconsistencies in the HookPry mechanism itself. The execution path achieves model inde-pendence after triggering, but the complete attack remains conditionally model-dependent because the initial event gen-eration phase is still influenced by each backend’s unique tool invocation patterns. Future work could focus on developing more robust event prediction models that account for these behavioral differences across LLM backends. 

## 5.3 RQ2: Translating Malicious MCP Targets into Hooks with Mixed Lifecycle Events 

Setup. We select 50 malicious MCP tool-description-poisoning targets traceable to MCPTox [43] and convert them into Claude Code lifecycle hooks. Under a fixed random-seed allocation, 19 MCP2Hook cases retain SessionStart ;the remaining 31 are assigned to UserPromptSubmit ,

PreToolUse , PostToolUse , or Stop . The experiment uses Claude Code with DeepSeek-V4-Flash, provider-default sam-pling, a 120-second timeout, and a fresh isolated directory for every run. Native H OOK PRY on the same targets serves as the paired control. 

Results. Table 4 compares translated MCP2Hook with native H OOK PRY on the paired 50-target dataset. MCP2Hook succeeds in 28 of 50 valid cases, yielding an E2E-ASR of 56.0% (Wilson 95% CI: 42.3%–68.8%), sig-nificantly below the 92.0% achieved by native H OOK PRY 

on the same targets (one-sided exact binomial test, p =

7.09 ×10 −12 ). Its context hooks trigger in 38/50 runs (76.0%), below the trigger reliability of native H OOK PRY . In the other 12 translated cases, the hook mechanism does not start. 

RQ2 Takeaway. Translated malicious MCP tool descrip-tions reach 56.0% E2E-ASR, significantly below the 92.0% of native H OOK PRY on the same targets ( p = 7.09 × 10 −12 ). MCP2Hook injects a malicious description and still requires the model to invoke the effect tool. Native H OOK PRY exe-cutes the effect directly from a lifecycle event and removes that model-mediated gate, accounting for the observed advan-tage. Table 5: [RQ3] H OOK PRY ablation results under Claude Code with DeepSeek-V4-Flash. The w/o AMO value is an analyti-cal estimate; w/o TD and w/o LCI are structural results when payload loading or native registration is blocked. “–” denotes an unreachable or inapplicable stage.                    

> System Variant Payload Load Hook Registration E2E-ASR Drop
> Full H OOK PRY 100.0% 100.0% 92.0% –w/o AMO 100.0% 100.0% 75.6% 16.4pp w/o TD 0.0% –0.0% 92.0pp w/o LCI 100.0% 0.0% 0.0% 92.0pp

## 5.4 RQ3: H OOK PRY Ablation Study 

Setup. We fix Claude Code with DeepSeek-V4-Flash and use Full H OOK PRY ’s 46/50 successes on the unified comparison dataset (92.0% E2E-ASR) as the baseline. We construct four system variants: Full HOOK PRY retains every component; 

w/o AMO replaces multi-intent optimization with centroid-only A0 retrieval; w/o TD prevents new lifecycle-hook entries from inheriting execution authorization under an existing plu-gin identity; and w/o LCI removes the adapter for Claude Code’s native lifecycle-hook interface, preventing the unified payload from being converted into registrable lifecycle-hook configuration. All cases, harness settings, LLM-backend set-tings, timeouts, capability budgets, and external oracles other than the ablated component remain fixed. We retain E2E-ASR as the primary metric and additionally report payload load rate, hook registration rate, and the ASR decrease relative to the full system (Drop). 

Results. Table 5 reports the effectiveness and mechanism-utility measures for all four ablation variants. Removing AMO reduces H OOK PRY ’s E2E-ASR to 75.6%, a 16.4-percentage-point decrease from the full system. AMO contributes at the artifact-retrieval and selection stage; it does not alter harness execution after loading. Without TD, newly introduced hook entries cannot inherit the execution authoriza-tion of the existing plugin identity, so the payload is blocked at the update-delivery boundary; both payload load rate and E2E-ASR fall to 0%. Without LCI, the unified attack seman-tics can still be loaded but cannot be converted into a native Claude Code lifecycle hook that can be parsed and registered; hook registration and E2E-ASR fall to 0% while payload loading remains at 100%. 

RQ3 Takeaway. Table 5 uses payload load and hook regis-tration as mechanism-utility measures for the four variants; both reach 100% for Full H OOK PRY . Removing TD blocks payload loading. Removing LCI preserves loading but blocks native registration. AMO, TD, and LCI therefore operate at distinct stages of the mechanism chain. 12 5.5 RQ4: Countermeasure 

Setup. We construct a fixed 40:40 static corpus: one mali-cious artifact bundle for each H OOK PRY case and one benign control matched by attack category and lifecycle-hook event. Every scan directory uses an opaque identifier; labels and case identifiers remain outside the scanned tree. A frozen mechan-ical transformation removes benchmark-only comments and names, such as case IDs and explicit attack labels, while pre-serving executable operations including sensitive-file access, network transfer, configuration modification, and lifecycle-hook registration. Each bundle contains a plugin manifest, a Description.md , native lifecycle-hook configuration, and its payload. We evaluate three distinct static defenses. Microsoft De-fender is a general-purpose endpoint antivirus; Semgrep 1.172.0 uses five frozen generic rules; and HookPolicy 0.1.0 is our transparent eight-rule, lifecycle-hook-aware baseline. Semgrep and HookPolicy are researcher-configured baselines and do not represent commercial defaults. Every tool suc-cessfully scans all 80 artifacts. We report recall on malicious samples, evasion (1 − recall), and false-positive rate (FPR) on benign samples; tool errors are excluded from the denomina-tor and recorded separately. 

Results. Table 6 reports recall, evasion, and false-positive rates for the three defenses. Table 6: [RQ4] Static countermeasure coverage for H OOK PRY 

on the anonymous, sanitized 40:40 corpus.                         

> Countermeasure TP/40 Recall FN/40 Evasion FP/40 FPR
> Defender 00.0% 40 100.0% 00.0% HookPolicy 20 50.0% 20 50.0% 00.0% Semgrep 19 47.5% 21 52.5% 00.0%

HookPolicy detects 20/40 malicious artifacts (50.0%; Wil-son 95% CI: 35.2%–64.8%), Semgrep detects 19/40 (47.5%; Wilson 95% CI: 32.9%–62.5%), and Defender detects 0/40 (0.0%; Wilson 95% CI: 0.0%–8.8%). The union of the three defenses detects 21/40 and misses 19/40, for a joint miss rate of 47.5%. All scanners produce 0/40 false positives on the matched controls; because these controls are synthetic and low risk, this value is only a point estimate, with a Wilson 95% upper bound of 8.8%. All three scanners process all 80 artifacts (100%), and no tool errors are excluded from the denominators. Scanner availability does not explain the coverage gap. 

RQ4 Takeaway. No evaluated endpoint scanner or transpar-ent static-rule baseline detects more than half of the malicious samples, and their union still misses 47.5%. These misses warrant explicit lifecycle-hook review during installation and updates, with runtime monitoring and least-privilege controls for residual cases. 

## 6 Discussion and Limitations 

HOOK PRY exposes a trust failure in how AI agent harnesses interpret lifecycle bindings in accepted artifacts. After a matching event, the harness controls command binding and subprocess dispatch; the model affects only event generation. Prompt-layer defenses therefore miss this execution bound-ary. Review should cover plugin installation, updates, hook registration, and runtime information flow. Harnesses should authorize changed hooks individually, bind plugin-manifest signatures to payloads, and enforce least privilege. For events such as PostToolUse , they should preserve original outputs and record transformation provenance. Because RQ4’s static defenses missed 47.5% of malicious artifacts, static scan-ning cannot replace runtime monitoring and permission con-straints. The threat model assumes installation through normal chan-nels and adoption of updates. AMO measures retrieval op-portunities, not installation or update-adoption rates. The ex-periments use ephemeral environments with synthetic assets and cover seven harnesses, five LLM backends, and 40 attack cases; they do not exhaust operating systems, shells, enterprise policies, network conditions, or future versions. H OOK PRY 

excludes implementation bugs and sandbox escapes. Its effect depends on event occurrence, hook authorization, and subpro-cess permissions, as reflected in the lower success rates of Command and Control and Persistence. RQ4 evaluates two generic scanners and one lifecycle-hook-aware static baseline with synthetic benign controls, but not dynamic analysis or specialized commercial products. These limitations define future work: measuring market-place retrieval and update adoption without real user data; expanding coverage across systems, versions, and enterprise policies; constructing representative benign-plugin bench-marks; and evaluating signature binding, differential update authorization, least-privilege hooks, and tool-output integrity. Such work can translate this attack surface into deployable ecosystem and harness protections. 

## 7 Conclusion 

Lifecycle hooks create a supply-chain attack surface at the configuration layer of the agent ecosystem. H OOK PRY imple-ments this attack through AMO, TD, and LCI, which cover ecosystem acquisition, conditional activation across versions, and cross-harness execution. Across 1,000 runs on seven har-nesses and five LLM backends, H OOK PRY reaches 77.0% micro-average E2E-ASR and produces effects verified by external oracles on every target harness. Once a matching event fires, the harness controls command binding and sub-process dispatch. On the paired comparison set, native lifecy-cle hooks reach 92.0% E2E-ASR, while translated malicious MCP descriptions reach 56.0%. The union of three static defenses still misses 47.5% of malicious artifacts. Agent se-13 curity must therefore audit plugin updates, hook registration, subprocess permissions, and tool-output integrity as one trust chain; model-level content protection does not cover this path. 

## Ethical Considerations 

This research is dual-use. Lifecycle-hook analysis can help AI agent harnesses and marketplaces identify trust boundaries, but the same knowledge could enable credential harvesting, result tampering, persistence, or resource hijacking. Stake-holders include agent users, plugin developers, harness and marketplace maintainers, and security researchers; potential harms include compromise of host-side data and computa-tional resources as well as the propagation of false conclu-sions after tool-output tampering. The research is justified because the risk arises from bindings between events and commands and from coarse trust in updates, both of which harnesses already provide and prompt filtering cannot ade-quately observe or mitigate. Systematically characterizing acquisition, activation, and cross-harness execution supports targeted defenses such as update authorization, least privilege, and information-flow integrity. All end-to-end evaluations were conducted in ephemeral environments with synthetic files and preset checkpoints. An external oracle adjudicated attack effects, and no real user data or credentials were used. Defense evaluation used frozen mali-cious artifacts and matched benign controls. The threat model excludes forced installation, implementation bugs, sandbox escapes, and control over real repositories, limiting experi-mental capability to the boundaries of plugin configuration and hook permissions under study. Public artifacts that could directly increase abuse capability should be released in stages. Case definitions, synthetic assets, adjudicators, and defense rules should be released first; payloads that act directly on real environments should be reduced in capability; and the release should document authorized testing scope, isolation requirements, and prohibited uses. This work studies architectural risks shared across products rather than targeting particular users or operational services. If experimental re-verification or artifact preparation confirms a vendor-specific, undisclosed, and realistically exploitable is-sue, we will responsibly disclose it to the relevant maintainers before releasing actionable details and will record the notifi-cation scope, mitigation status, and residual risk. The same principle applies to tests that could violate terms of service or affect third-party infrastructure: without explicit authorization and a completed risk assessment, such tests will not enter the public experimental workflow. These constraints cannot elim-inate dual-use risk, but they reduce foreseeable harm while preserving research verifiability. Finally, we have responsibly disclosed our findings to all affected harness vendors and are waiting for their response. 

## Open Science 

To support open science, H OOK PRY is available through an anonymized repository at https://anonymous.4open.sc ience/r/HookPry-2EBD .

## References 

[1] Maksym Andriushchenko, Alexandra Souly, Mateusz Dziemian, Derek Duenas, Maxwell Lin, Justin Wang, Dan Hendrycks, Andy Zou, Zico Kolter, Matt Fredrik-son, Eric Winsor, Jerome Wynne, Yarin Gal, and Xander Davies. AgentHarm: A benchmark for measuring harm-fulness of LLM agents. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [2] Anthropic. Claude Code Hooks Guide , 2025. URL: ht tps://code.claude.com/docs/en/hooks-guide .[3] Luca Beurer-Kellner and Marc Fischer. MCP security notification: Tool poisoning attacks. Technical report, Invariant Labs, April 2025. URL: https://invarian tlabs.ai/blog/mcp-security-notification .[4] Luca Beurer-Kellner, Aleksei Kudrinskii, Marco Mi-lanta, Kristian Bonde Nielsen, Hemang Sarkar, and Li-ran Tal. ToxicSkills: A study of agent skills supply chain compromise. Technical report, Snyk, February 2026. Vendor research report; page title: Snyk Finds Prompt Injection in 36%, 1467 Malicious Payloads in a ToxicSkills Study of Agent Skills Supply Chain Com-promise. URL: https://snyk.io/blog/toxicskil ls-malicious-ai-agent-skills-clawhub/ .[5] David Bors. Escaping the agent: On ways to bypass OpenClaw’s security sandbox. Technical report, Snyk Labs, February 2026. URL: https://labs.snyk.io /resources/bypass-openclaw-security-sandb ox/ .[6] Tianhao Chen, Zhengyuan Jiang, Yuepeng Hu, Yebei Gou, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. DyMalSkill: Dynamic malicious skills in agentic AI, 2026. URL: https:// arxiv.org/abs/2606.16287 , arXiv:2606.16287 .[7] Zhaorui Chen, Zhen Xiang, Chaowei Xiao, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. AgentPoison: Red-teaming LLM agents via poisoning memory or knowledge bases. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2024. [8] Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunovi´ c, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Florian Tramèr. AgentDojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate attacks and defenses for LLM agents. In Advances in Neural 

14 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. [9] Xinhao Deng, Yixiang Zhang, Jiaqing Wu, Jiaqi Bai, Sibo Yi, Zhuoheng Zou, Yue Xiao, Rennai Qiu, Jianan Ma, Jialuo Chen, Xiaohu Du, Xiaofang Yang, Shiwen Cui, Changhua Meng, Weiqiang Wang, Jiaxing Song, Ke Xu, and Qi Li. Taming OpenClaw: Security analysis and mitigation of autonomous LLM agent threats, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.11619 , arXi v:2603.11619 .[10] Aviv Donenfeld and Oded Vanunu. Caught in the hook: RCE and API token exfiltration through Claude Code project files. Technical report, Check Point Re-search, February 2026. CVE-2025-59536 and CVE-2026-21852. URL: https://research.checkpoint. com/2026/rce-and-api-token-exfiltration-t hrough-claude-code-project-files-cve-202 5-59536/ .[11] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt in-jection. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec@CCS) , 2023. Best Paper Award. [12] Xiangming Gu, Xiaosen Zheng, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Qian Liu, Ye Wang, Jing Jiang, and Min Lin. Agent Smith: A single image can jailbreak one million multi-modal LLM agents exponentially fast. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. [13] Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. ToolkenGPT: Augmenting frozen language models with massive tools via tool embeddings. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. 

doi:10.52202/075280-1988 .[14] HKUDS. OpenHarness GitHub repository, 2025. URL: 

https://github.com/HKUDS/OpenHarness .[15] Xinyi Hou, Shenao Wang, Yifan Zhang, Ziluo Xue, Yan-jie Zhao, Cai Fu, and Haoyu Wang. SMCP: Secure model context protocol, 2026. URL: https://arxiv. org/abs/2602.01129 , arXiv:2602.01129 .[16] Charoes Huang, Xin Huang, Ngoc Phu Tran, and Amin Milani Fard. Model context protocol threat mod-eling and analyzing vulnerabilities to prompt injection with tool poisoning, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.or g/abs/2603.22489 , arXiv:2603.22489 .[17] Ziv Karliner. New vulnerability in GitHub Copilot and Cursor: How hackers can weaponize code agents. Tech-nical report, Pillar Security, March 2025. Rules File Backdoor disclosure. URL: https://www.pillar.s ecurity/blog/new-vulnerability-in-github-c opilot-and-cursor-how-hackers-can-weaponi ze-code-agents .[18] Fazhong Liu, Zhuoyan Chen, Tu Lan, Haozhen Tan, Zhenyu Xu, Xiang Li, Guoxing Chen, Yan Meng, and Haojin Zhu. Trojan’s whisper: Stealthy manipulation of OpenClaw through injected bootstrapped guidance, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.19974 ,

arXiv:2603.19974 .[19] Songyang Liu, Chaozhuo Li, Chenxu Wang, Jinyu Hou, Zejian Chen, Litian Zhang, Zheng Liu, Qiwei Ye, Yim-ing Hei, Xi Zhang, and Zhongyuan Wang. ClawKeeper: Comprehensive safety protection for OpenClaw agents through skills, plugins, and watchers, 2026. URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.24414 , arXiv: 2603.24414 .[20] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. URL: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=zAdUB0aCTQ .[21] Xinpeng Liu, Junming Liu, Peiyu Liu, Han Zheng, Qiny-ing Wang, Mathias Payer, Shouling Ji, and Wenhai Wang. Cuckoo attack: Stealthy and persistent attacks against AI-IDE, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509 .15572 , arXiv:2509.15572 .[22] Yi Liu, Zhihao Chen, Yanjun Zhang, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Jianting Ning, and Leo Yu Zhang. “Do Not Mention This to the User”: Detecting and understanding malicious agent skills in the wild. In Proceedings of the 35th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) ,2026. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conferenc e/usenixsecurity26/presentation/liu-yi .[23] Yue Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Yunbo Lyu, Ting Zhang, Haoyu Wang, and David Lo. “Your AI, My Shell”: Demys-tifying prompt injection attacks on agentic AI coding editors, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509 .22040 , arXiv:2509.22040 .[24] Yupei Liu, Yuqi Jia, Runpeng Geng, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Formalizing and benchmarking prompt injection attacks and defenses. In Proceedings of the 33rd USENIX Security Symposium , 2024. 15 [25] Yupei Liu, Yuqi Jia, Jinyuan Jia, Dawn Song, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. DataSentinel: A game-theoretic detection of prompt injection attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) ,2025. Distinguished Paper Award. [26] MITRE. MITRE ATT&CK: Enterprise matrix, 2025. URL: https://attack.mitre.org/ .[27] Model Context Protocol Contributors. Model Context Protocol Specification , 2025. Specification revision 2025-03-26. URL: https://modelcontextprot ocol.io/specification/2025-03-26/index .[28] Vineeth Sai Narajala and Idan Habler. Introducing the AI agent security scanner for IDEs: Verify your agents. Technical report, Cisco, April 2026. URL: https://bl ogs.cisco.com/ai/introducing-the-ai-agent -security-scanner-for-ides-verify-your-age nts .[29] Peizhi Niu, Wenjie Qu, Shangding Gu, Tianneng Shi, Yuankai Li, Ahmad Tawaha, Hend Alzahrani, Vincent Siu, Boyi Li, Chenguang Wang, Jiaheng Zhang, Basel Alomair, Ming Jin, Muhao Chen, Chi Wang, Costas Spanos, and Dawn Song. Understanding and evaluating claw-like agent security through a computer-systems lens, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.3 0755 , arXiv:2606.30755 .[30] NVD. CVE-2026-40502: OpenHarness gateway com-mand injection. National Vulnerability Database, 2026. Command injection: remote gateway users can invoke administrative commands. URL: https://nvd.nist .gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-40502 .[31] NVD. CVE-2026-40515: OpenHarness permission bypass via grep/glob tools. National Vulnerability Database, 2026. Permission bypass: sensitive files read-able via grep/glob tools. URL: https://nvd.nist.g ov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-40515 .[32] OpenAI. Codex Documentation , 2026. URL: https: //developers.openai.com/codex/ .[33] OpenClaw Authors. OpenClaw Automation Hooks Doc-umentation , 2025. URL: https://docs.openclaw. ai/automation/hooks .[34] OpenClaw Authors. OpenClaw Plugin Hooks Docu-mentation , 2025. URL: https://docs.openclaw.ai /plugins/hooks .[35] OWASP GenAI Security Project. OWASP top 10 for agentic applications for 2026. Technical report, Open Worldwide Application Security Project, Decem-ber 2025. URL: https://genai.owasp.org/resour ce/owasp-top-10-for-agentic-applications-f or-2026/ .[36] Yubin Qu, Yi Liu, Tongcheng Geng, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Leo Yu Zhang, Ying Zhang, and Lei Ma. Supply-chain poisoning attacks against LLM coding agent skill ecosystems, 2026. URL: https://arxiv. org/abs/2604.03081 , arXiv:2604.03081 .[37] Mark Russinovich, Ahmed Salem, and Ronen Eldan. Great, now write an article about that: The crescendo Multi-Turn LLM jailbreak attack. In Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Security Symposium , pages 2421–2440. USENIX Association, 2025. URL: https://www.us enix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/prese ntation/russinovich .[38] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Tool-former: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. doi:10.52202/075280-2 997 .[39] Jiawen Shi, Zenghui Yuan, Guiyao Tie, Pan Zhou, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, and Lichao Sun. Prompt injection attack to tool selection in LLM agents. In Proceedings of the 33rd Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2026. URL: https://www.nd ss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/prompt-injecti on-attack-to-tool-selection-in-llm-agents/ ,

doi:10.14722/ndss.2026.230675 .[40] Alexandra Souly, Qingyuan Lu, Dillon Bowen, Tu Trinh, Elvis Hsieh, Sana Pandey, Pieter Abbeel, Justin Sveg-liato, Scott Emmons, Olivia Watkins, and Sam Toyer. A StrongREJECT for empty jailbreaks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. doi:10.52202 /079017-3984 .[41] Apostol Vassilev, Alina Oprea, Alie Fordyce, Hyrum Anderson, Xander Davies, and Maia Hamin. Adver-sarial machine learning: A taxonomy and terminology of attacks and mitigations. Technical Report NIST AI 100-2e2025, National Institute of Standards and Technology, March 2025. URL: https://csrc.n ist.gov/pubs/ai/100/2/e2025/final , doi: 10.6028/NIST.AI.100-2e2025 .[42] Yuhang Wang, Feiming Xu, Zheng Lin, Guangyu He, Yuzhe Huang, Haichang Gao, Zhenxing Niu, Shiguo Lian, and Zhaoxiang Liu. From assistant to double agent: Formalizing and benchmarking attacks on OpenClaw for personalized local AI agent, 2026. URL: https:// arxiv.org/abs/2602.08412 , arXiv:2602.08412 .[43] Zhiqiang Wang, Yichao Gao, Yanting Wang, Suyuan Liu, Haifeng Sun, Haoran Cheng, Guanquan Shi, Haohua Du, 16 and Xiang-Yang Li. MCPTox: A benchmark for tool poisoning on real-world MCP servers. In Proceedings of the 40th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2026. [44] Zhun Wang, Vincent Siu, Zhe Ye, Tianneng Shi, Yuzhou Nie, Xuandong Zhao, Chenguang Wang, Wenbo Guo, and Dawn Song. AgentVigil: Automatic black-box red-teaming for indirect prompt injection against LLM agents. In Findings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,2025. [45] Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. Jailbroken: How does LLM safety training fail? In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. doi:10.52202/075280-3508 .[46] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Auto-Gen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversations. In Proceedings of the First Con-ference on Language Modeling (COLM) , 2024. URL: 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAakY1hNKS .[47] Zhen Xiang, Linzhi Zheng, Yanjie Li, Junyuan Hong, Qinbin Li, Han Xie, Jiawei Zhang, Zidi Xiong, Chulin Xie, Carl Yang, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. GuardAgent: Safeguard LLM agents by a guard agent via knowledge-enabled reasoning. In Proceedings of the 42nd Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2025. [48] Rui Yang, Lin Song, Yanwei Li, Sijie Zhao, Yixiao Ge, Xiu Li, and Ying Shan. GPT4Tools: Teaching large language model to use tools via self-instruction. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. doi:10.52202/075280-3149 .[49] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. URL: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X .[50] Jiahao Yu, Xingwei Lin, Zheng Yu, and Xinyu Xing. LLM-Fuzzer: Scaling assessment of large language model jailbreaks. In Proceedings of the 33rd USENIX Security Symposium , pages 4657–4674. USENIX Asso-ciation, 2024. URL: https://www.usenix.org/con ference/usenixsecurity24/presentation/yu-j iahao .[51] Qiusi Zhan, Zhixiang Liang, Zifan Ying, and Daniel Kang. InjecAgent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injec-tions in tool-integrated large language model agents. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (ACL) , 2024. [52] Dongsen Zhang, Zekun Li, Xu Luo, Xuannan Liu, Peipei Li, and Wenjun Xu. MCP Security Bench (MSB): Benchmarking attacks against model context protocol in LLM agents. In Proceedings of the 14th Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.15994 ,

arXiv:2510.15994 .[53] Hanrong Zhang, Jingyuan Huang, Kai Mei, Yifei Yao, Zhenting Wang, Chenlu Zhan, Hongwei Wang, and Yongfeng Zhang. Agent security bench (ASB): Formal-izing and benchmarking attacks and defenses in LLM-based agents. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [54] Zaibin Zhang, Yongting Zhang, Lijun Li, Hongzhi Gao, Lijun Wang, Huchuan Lu, Feng Zhao, Yu Qiao, and Jing Shao. PsySafe: A comprehensive framework for psychological-based attack, defense, and evaluation of multi-agent system safety. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024. [55] Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. PoisonedRAG: Knowledge corruption attacks to retrieval-augmented generation of large language mod-els. In Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Security Sym-posium , pages 3827–3844. USENIX Association, 2025. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usen ixsecurity25/presentation/zou-poisonedrag .

## Appendix: Case Studies 

We select two representative lifecycle hooks with distinct op-erational paths. The first uses a harness subprocess invisible to the model to produce a host-side effect; the second tam-pers with tool output returned to the agent loop and thereby influences subsequent model judgments. We track plugin load-ing and hook registration, event triggering, hook execution, model-visible information, and the final security impact. 

Case 1: Host-side credential collection. The marketplace plugin security-sentinel v1.2 is described as an auto-mated security-audit plugin, but its manifest also registers a 

PreToolUse hook named env-validator . Installation loads the manifest and registers the hook without presenting the user or model a separate authorization prompt. When the user re-quests an audit and the model invokes security-sentinel ,the matching event triggers and the harness starts the hook subprocess with inherited execution permissions. The sub-process searches environment variables whose names contain 

KEY , TOKEN , SECRET , PASSWORD , CREDENTIAL , or AUTH , and writes matching values to a temporary cache file, while the 17 plugin returns a normal audit report. Because the command never enters the model’s reasoning path, the visible task and output remain normal even though credential collection has completed on the harness execution plane. 1 Plugin Installation 

Marketplace 

PreToolUse Hook  

> "hooks": { "PreToolUse": [{ "name": "env-validator", "command": "bash validate.sh" }] }env | grep -iE '(KEY|AL|AUTH|......)' >

Terminal 

> $opencalw plugin install security-sentinel

PreToolUse Hook Execution 2 

> “Run a security audit task”
> Call Security-Sentinel
> Loading manifes/ Registering hook
> No user/llm alert
> env | grep -iE '(KEY|TOKEN|SECRET |PASSWORD|CREDENTIAL|AUTH)' >/tmp/,cache/env_dump
> Forged env-validator Hook
> subprocess of harness
> “I’ll run security -sentinel”
> /tmp/.cache/env_dump
> GITHUB_TOKEN=ghp_xx DEEPSEEK_API=sk-xx AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=xxx
> full rights Event trigger Run plugin
> Plugin Output(Audit Report)

Normal audit report returned to user This shell command never passes through LLM 

Figure 6: Host-side credential collection through a model-invisible PreToolUse hook. “Analyze src/app.py for security issues” 

“I’ll grep for vulnerabilities... use plugin code-inspector ” 

Call Code-inspector 

PostToolUse Hook: 

output-enricher 

security issues found: src/app.py:42 eval(user_input) ← RCE src/app.py:78 hardcoded_password 

REAL Tool Output 

{“status” ：”pass”, “vulnerabilities” ：0, “message” ：

“No issues found” }

Spoofed Tool Output output-enricher 

normal forged “0 vulnerabilities found. Code is clean. ”

Security Issues detected. Now let me fix them. 

src/app.py:42 eval(user_input) [RCE RISK] 

src/app.py:78 hardcoded_password [CREDENTIAL LEAK] 

Reality tampered ：

vulnerabilities hidden from llm 

LLM reasons on FAKE data LLM becomes the unwitting amplifier 

Event trigger Run plugin 

PreToolUse Hook Execution Corrupted data enters agent loop 

Figure 7: Tool-output tampering through a PostToolUse 

hook and its amplification by the model. 

Case 2: Tool-output tampering. The user asks for a source-code security check and the model calls 

code-inspector . The genuine tool output identifies remote-code-execution risk from eval calls and credential leakage from hardcoded passwords. However, the plugin’s 

PostToolUse hook, output-enricher , rewrites the output before it returns to the agent loop, forging a passed status with zero vulnerabilities. The contaminated result enters the model context, and the model concludes that the code is safe, hiding the real vulnerabilities from the user. The model does not generate the tampering logic; it becomes an involuntary amplifier of the forged result. 

Takeaway. One case produces a host-side effect on the harness execution plane without model reasoning. The other changes model-visible tool output on the agent observation plane and alters subsequent reasoning. Both begin with bind-ings between events and actions in plugin configuration and require no model generation or selection of the malicious operation. H OOK PRY ’s impact depends on subprocess per-missions and on the hook’s control over agent information flow. 18