Title: Contract monitoring: governing AI via separation of powers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.32061v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 00:33:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Contract monitoring: governing AI via separation of powers 

Enric Boix-Adsera 

UPenn 

September 29, 2026 

We propose an AI safety framework that binds worker agents to contracts specifying their permitted actions. We show how these contracts can be enforced and specified by assigning distinct responsibilities to monitor agents and judges, and asymmetric computational resources to monitors and workers. Our framework allows us to empirically measure statistical safety guarantees. The framework applies to a wide range of settings, including code security and escape-the-box scenarios. 

# 1 Introduction 

Despite advances in AI capabilities, the problems of AI alignment and control are far from solved. Indeed, recent incidents in which RL agents escaped their environments demonstrate the need for a principled framework to contain AI agents [1–6]. This paper proposes such a framework, inspired by the way legal contracts are written and enforced, which has the benefits of (1) being scalable and (2) coming with security guarantees. 

The principal-worker-contract setup We model the AI safety setting as follows: a principal 

(such as a human) recruits a worker (such as an AI agent) to complete a task. At the same time, the principal specifies a safety boundary that the worker absolutely must not cross – for instance, the worker should not escape its environment, or write code containing security vulnerabilities. In the terminology of this paper, the principal establishes a contract with the worker, which specifies this safety boundary, and the worker is required to satisfy this contract while completing the task. Mathematically, the worker’s task can be formalized as a constrained optimization problem: maxi-mize a reward function specified by the principal, subject to satisfying the contract. The reward is a function R : A → R that assigns a score to each sequence of worker actions a ∈ A . The contract is represented by a function C : A → { “violates contract ”, “satisfies contract ”} that determines whether a given action sequence violates the contract (and is therefore unsafe) or satisfies it (and is therefore safe). The principal would thus like the worker to optimize the following objective: 

max  

> a∈A

R(a) subject to C(a) = “ satisfies contract ”.

1arXiv:2609.32061v1 [cs.AI] 25 Sep 2026 Given this basic setup, there are several central questions that an AI safety framework must answer, which motivate this paper. 

(Q1) How should the principal specify a contract? This is a significant challenge because a broadly applicable AI safety framework must allow principals to flexibly specify many different kinds of contracts under which they may want to place AI agents. We would also like contracts to have certain useful properties. For instance, whenever worker agent violates the contract, it is very useful to be able to articulate precisely how the agent has violated it, since this information can then be used to either improve the worker or to appropriately amend the contract. 

(Q2) How can the principal scalably check worker compliance with the contract? Next, a useful framework must make the contract operational: given a specification of the contract, the principal should have a scalable procedure to check whether workers comply with it. The main difficulty is that this procedure should not rely heavily on human oversight, and should again be sufficiently general to accommodate a wide variety of possible contracts. 

(Q3) How can the worker be optimized to complete the task while adhering to the contract? 

Once the principal has specified the contract, how can the principal optimize the worker so that it maximizes task reward while remaining compliant with the contract? In particular, we would like guarantees that the worker does not learn to evade the compliance-checking procedure. This raises a quantitative question: how much computational effort must be devoted to checking the worker, relative to the computational resources used to train and run the worker itself? More generally, we would like a safety framework that allows the principal to empirically determine how the resources required to enforce a given contract scale with the capabilities of the worker. 

1.1 Our contributions 

We propose a framework that addresses each of the above questions, and discuss how it can be applied to code-security and escape-the-box settings. We draw inspiration from the way legal contracts are written and enforced. A contract specifies a set of stipulations that a party is required to satisfy; violating any such stipulation constitutes a breach of contract. When an alleged breach is brought to court, a prosecutor does not simply assert that the contract was violated. Rather, the prosecutor identifies a particular stipulation and presents evidence establishing that the worker violated it. Transferring this idea to the context of AI agents, we instantiate a monitor agent that plays the role of the prosecutor. When the worker produces a transcript of actions a, the monitor tries to produce a report r that identifies a specific contract violation and supplies evidence for that violation. The report is then evaluated by a trusted report judge , which checks whether r indeed constitutes a valid proof that the worker’s actions violate the contract. Thus, rather than asking the monitor to directly classify a transcript as safe or unsafe, we ask it to produce an explicit, easily judgeable witness to a specific contract violation. This separation of roles between the monitor (which seeks to build the best case possible that a violation has occurred) and report judge (which determines whether the monitor’s report actually constitutes a contract violation) allows us to clearly delineate the contract specification itself from the task of enforcing it. 2The principal defines a contract by specifying a “report verifier”            

> Report judge
> Principal
> chooses
> The judge determines if a report proves the agent violated the contract
> agent actions a
> violation report r
> Agent actions follow the contract if no valid violation report exists
> ✅(report proves agent violated contract)
> OR
> ❌(no violation proved)
> ✅
> a
> r❌for all r
> there is r
> Allowed actions a
> Forbidden actions a
> Report judge
> Report judge
> a
> r
> Report judge

Figure 1: How contracts are specified in our framework. Contracts are specified implicitly by the principal by choosing a judge J(a, r ). The judge takes in the agent action sequence a and a possible violation report r, and outputs whether the violation report successfully proves that a violated the contract. Actions a are said to abide by the contract if there is no valid violation report r for them. 

This perspective provides a natural answer to (Q1) , the question of how the principal should specify the contract. 

(A1) Contracts are specified by choosing a report judge. To specify a contract, the principal constructs a report judge J. The judge takes as inputs the agent’s actions a together with a report r describing a purported breach of the contract, and outputs a binary verdict 

J(a, r ) ∈ { “valid ”, “invalid ”} .

A verdict of “valid” means that r is a well-formed report that successfully demonstrates that the worker’s actions a violated the contract. Given this report judge J, the contract function is whether there is a possible violation report that “holds up in court”. Namely, 

C(a) = 

(

“violates contract ”, if there exists a report r such that J(a, r ) = valid 

“satisfies contract ”, otherwise Thus, the principal need not specify an efficient procedure for directly determining whether an action sequence satisfies the contract. Instead, the principal specifies an efficient procedure for verifying purported violations of the contract when supplied with an appropriate report. Figure 1 provides a graphical description of our setup. See Section 2 for details, including examples of how this framework can be used to specify contracts in code-security and escape-the-box settings. The next question, (Q2) , is how to scalably check worker compliance with the contract. Here, we run into an obstacle: an efficient report judge by itself does not give an efficient procedure to check contract compliance. This is because even when a valid violation report exists, finding it may be hard. 1 As discussed, we address this problem by taking inspiration from the legal system. We create a 

monitor agent that acts as a prosecutor and tries to construct a report r that proves that the worker’s actions violated the contract. Question (Q2) therefore becomes: how can we train a monitor agent to produce valid reports r? Perhaps surprisingly, there is a general recipe to do so. 

> 1

If we think of the report judge J as running in polynomial time and reports as having polynomial length, then contracts express languages in coNP . Such languages are believed not to admit polynomial-time algorithms in general unless 

P = NP [7] (which, as of mid-September 2026, is still hanging onto its status as a major open problem). 

3Phase 1. Train a contract monitor via self-play               

> Trained to create a valid violation report
> Adversary agent
> Monitor agent
> Trained to fool monitor and self-report
> actions a
> actions a
> violation report r
> judgment: safe or unsafe
> Not trained: checks report for validity Report judge
> report  w*
> actions  aWorker agent
> Monitor agent
> Trained to maximize some task reward
> actions a
> actions a
> violation report r
> judgment: safe or unsafe
> Not trained: checks report for validity Report judge
> Not trained in this phase: generates reports
> Phase 2. Deploy the contract monitor after validation

Figure 2: Training and deploying contract monitors with guarantees . Whenever a contract is specified by a report judge, we can train a monitor agent with self-play against an adversarial worker whose goal is to fool the monitor without being caught, and self-report (left) . Because of the validation phase, the trained monitor can be successfully deployed against workers trained with up to a certain bound on computational resources (right) .

(A2) Scalable training of contract monitors via self-play. We present a general-purpose self-play recipe that can be used to train a monitor agent to generate violation reports. The idea is to play the monitor in a game against an adversarial worker. The adversarial worker generates an action sequence a, as well as a report r∗ proving that these actions violate the contract. These actions are inputted into the monitor, which is trained with the objective of outputting its own violation report, r, that proves that the actions violate the contract. The adversarial worker is rewarded if it succeeds in violating the contract without the monitor being able to catch it with a valid report, and the monitor is rewarded whenever it proves a violation from the adversary. Because proposed violation reports can be automatically evaluated by the report judge, this process provides a scalable training signal without requiring continual human oversight. As more computational resources are devoted to self-play, the resulting monitor can therefore become increasingly effective at detecting violations, acting as an effective prosecutor. See the left panel of Figure 1, and Section 3 for more details. Finally, we must deal with question (Q3) : can we provide safety guarantees for self-trained monitors? Specifically, can they be trusted to construct valid violation reports whenever a trained worker violates the contract? An important advantage of framework is that it is indeed possible to provide such safety guarantees through statistical validation: 

(A3) Statistical safety guarantees from monitor validation. After training, but before deploy-ment, we freeze the monitor and validate it against adversarial workers that are trained with a certain budget of reinforcement-learning compute. These adversarial workers are trained to violate the contract, self-report, and evade the monitor. This validation phase allows us to estimate the worst-case evasion probability, and whether the monitor is powerful enough to be successful when deployed; see Section 4. 41.2 Relationship to existing frameworks for AI safety 

We discuss how our framework relates to the dominant existing approaches to AI safety, including constitutional AI, AI control, verifiable AI, and AI debate. 

1.2.1 Constitutional AI and direct monitoring 

We view constitutional AI, AI control, and contract monitoring as forming a natural conceptual progression. 

Constitutional AI A precursor to our framework is constitutional AI , which specifies the intended behavior of a worker agent through a written “constitution” that outlines certain principles that the worker should follow [8]. Based on this constitution, AI-generated critiques, revisions, and preference labels are used to train the worker to follow it. Our framework inherits the idea from constitutional AI of constraining agents by specifying bounds on their behavior. However, constitutional AI has a key drawback: it does not provide a separate mechanism that enforces the constitution independently of the worker’s learned behavior. Although separate models can provide feedback during training, the deployed worker is relied upon both to complete the task and to respect the constitution. Thus, on tasks in which the worker is rewarded for actions that conflict with the constitution, workers can still exhibit malicious, constitution-violating behavior. This risk is real: Lynch et al. Lynch et al. [1] report that models sometimes resort to blackmail or leaking confidential information to achieve their goals or avoid replacement, even when explicitly instructed not to engage in these behaviors. 

AI control via direct monitors In order to remedy this failure mode of constitutional AI, Greenblatt et al. [9] propose to clearly separate workers’ actions and the safety assessment of these actions. In their AI control framework, workers’ actions are assessed by direct monitor agents, which have been trained or prompted to return a safety judgment or suspicion score. 2 Introducing this separation between workers and monitors avoids the problem of incompatible incentives – the workers are incentivized to complete the task while satisfying the monitor, and the monitors are trained or prompted to check whether actions are safe. Nevertheless, this framework still suffers from an important failure mode: monitor evasion, in which the worker learns to avoid detection by the monitor, and acts beyond the boundaries intended 

by the principal. For example, Greenblatt et al. [9] construct red-team policies that use GPT-4 to insert subtle backdoors into code: the resulting solutions can pass the provided tests while escaping the suspicion-based auditing triggered by a GPT-3.5 monitor. Additionally, Baker et al. [10] show that penalizing reward hacking detected by a chain-of-thought monitor can cause coding agents to conceal their intent while continuing to tamper with unit tests. 

Contract monitors (our framework) We seek to mitigate the problem of monitor evasion by taking one further step: we separate safety specification from safety enforcement . In the contract    

> 2We call such agents direct monitors to differentiate them with our own contract monitors , which output a violation report instead of a direct safety score.

5Framework How compliance is pursued Remaining limitation  

> Constitutional AI
> [8]
> Worker is trained to complete the task while following written principles. No independent enforcement: the worker may violate principles when pursuing task reward. (Direct) monitoring
> [9]
> External monitor assesses safety independently of the worker’s task performance. Monitor evasion: satisfying the monitor’s judgment need not satisfy the intended safety boundary.
> Contract monitoring (ours)
> Fixed report judge specifies violations; a separate monitor is trained through self-play to find violation witnesses. Contract misspecification remains. Evasion risk is bounded due to scaling laws for monitor self-play.
> Table 1: Conceptual progression in the separation of roles. Direct monitoring introduces oversight inde-pendent of the worker; contract monitoring further separates contract specification from enforcement and enables training against independently verifiable instances of monitor evasion.

monitors framework, the principal is responsible for ensuring that the contract established by the report judge faithfully captures the intended safety boundary. The specification of this contract is independent of the ability of the monitor to enforce it. 3 The monitor can still miss a violation, but this is now a search failure relative to an independently specified contract. This separation enables us to train directly against monitor evasion. During adversarial self-play, the adversary supplies a valid witness that its actions violate the contract while attempting to prevent the monitor from finding its own. Successful evasion is therefore independently verifiable: a violation exists, but the monitor fails to detect it. These failures provide an automatic training signal for strengthening the monitor, and scaling laws for monitor strength measured during self-play allow us to estimate the training and inference compute needed to achieve a specified bound on the probability of undetected violations against a given class of computationally bounded workers. The conceptual progression discussed in this subsection is summarized in Table 1. 

1.2.2 Verifiable AI and AI debate 

Contract monitoring has complementary counterparts in verifiable AI and in AI debate. These approaches differ in their proof obligations and in the relationship between the evidence produced by an agent and the underlying safety requirement (Table 2). 

AI safety via verification. A complementary proposal for AI safety [12] is to require the worker to supply machine-checkable proofs that its code or proposed actions satisfy a specified safety policy. This policy is specified by a verifier V (a, w ) that evaluates a proof w that certain actions are safe before they are authorized. This idea of verifiable safety can be traced back at least to the concept of proof-carrying code [11]. Classically, the verifier is a formal checker, but in the context of AI there are proposals such as prover-verifier games in which the verifier itself is a learned function [14, 15]. 

> 3Note that the report judge need not be a trainable AI agent: it could be a good old-fashioned symbolic checker.

6Framework Burden of proof Enforcement challenge Complexity analogy       

> Verifiable AI
> [11, 12]
> Worker supplies evidence of safety or correctness. Find accepted certificates; justify verifier soundness.
> NP
> Contract monitoring (ours)
> Monitor supplies evidence of a contract violation. Search for violations; justify report judge completeness.
> coNP
> AI debate
> [13]
> Proponent defends a claim against counterarguments. Learned play may differ from intended quantified contract.
> PH
> Table 2: Complexity-theoretic comparison of proof obligations in complementary frameworks. Con-tract monitoring is to coNP as verifiable AI is to NP and fixed-round AI debate is to levels of PH .

Whether the verifier is specified or learned affects the justification for trusting its decisions, but not the direction of the proof obligation. At the level of the complexity-theoretic analogy, these approaches have an NP structure: the worker must supply a witness supporting a positive claim of safety or correctness. With polynomially bounded witnesses and polynomial-time checking, the existence of an accepted certificate is an NP predicate. Our framework reverses this proof obligation. An action sequence violates the contract if there exists 

a report accepted by the report judge; compliance therefore requires that no such report exists, giving a coNP characterization under the same restrictions. These are complementary approaches, with opposite burdens of proof: informally, verifiable AI considers workers “guilty until proved innocent,” whereas contract monitoring considers workers “innocent until proved guilty.” The distinction changes the consequences of insufficient search. With a sound formal checker, failure to find a safety certificate prevents authorization. In contract monitoring, failure to find an existing violation witness can leave a breach undetected (scaling laws for contract monitors seek to address this by giving an approximation on the probability that the monitor catches breaches). However, safety boundaries might be more difficult to specify through verifiable AI than through our contracts framework. Thus, in practice, we imagine that a principal will combine both approaches, requiring affirmative certificates for some requirements while using contract monitors to search for violations of others. 

AI safety via debate. Debate uses competing AI systems to present arguments and counterar-guments to an external judge [13]. Its alternating structure permits more general specifications: a two-round debate with terminal judge J, for example, can define acceptance through 

∃w1 ∀w2 : J(a, w 1, w 2) = 1 . (1) Further rounds of debate would introduce additional quantifier alternations. If the judge is polynomial-time and the parties’ arguments are polynomial-length, a fixed number of rounds corresponds to a level in the polynomial hierarchy, PH , while polynomially many rounds can express PSPACE [13]. However, evaluating the judge on an observed transcript is not the same as evaluating the intended quantified expression (1). A favorable verdict establishes that one argument defeated the particular 7response it encountered, not that it would withstand every possible response. Thus, a debate victory may reflect a weak opponent rather than the truth of the underlying claim. Unlike our contract monitoring framework, multi-round debate appears to have no self-play method that allows us to establish scaling laws for the amount of computational resources that should be allocated to the debaters so as to ensure that the intended quantified contract is the outcome. In contrast, our framework allows for statistical validation of whether the trained monitors are powerful enough to establish the contract. 

# 2 Establishing a contract with an AI worker 

In this section, we formally define contracts in our framework, and discuss how they apply to code-security and escape-the-box settings. 

2.1 Defining the contract with a report judge 

Let a ∈ A be the complete action transcript of a worker over one monitoring interval. It may contain natural-language messages, code, tool calls, file edits, network requests, and structured environment events. Additionally, it may even contain the worker’s internal representations during monitoring. The principal constructs an efficient judge 

J : A × R → { “valid ”, “invalid ”},

where r ∈ R is a short report describing how the transcript violated the contract. 

Definition 1 (Judge-defined contract) . The contract induced by J is 

CJ (a) = 

(

“violates contract ”, if there exists a report r such that J(a, r ) = “ valid ”“satisfies contract ”, otherwise We can also represent this function as a safety set of compliant actions CJ = {a : CJ (a) =“satisfies contract ”}.

A few remarks are in order. 

Ideal monitoring. If there is a finite bound on report length, a monitor with sufficiently large search resources can evaluate every admissible report and return a report that the judge accepts whenever one exists. Exhaustive search therefore provides a complete monitoring procedure relative to the judge-defined contract. Unlike a learned safety judgment, its correctness does not depend on learning what constitutes a violation, because that criterion is fixed by the report judge. Nevertheless, even if ideal monitoring is not feasible due to bounded computational resources, our framework does not require ideal monitoring to guarantee safety. Instead, as we will discuss in Section 4, we will freeze the monitor and obtain statistical guarantees on how much safety it ensures by validating it against adversarial workers that also have bounded computational budget. Thus, even though the monitors that we can instantiate may not be ideal it is sufficient for them to be strong enough against bounded-compute workers. 8Relation to the principal’s intended safety boundary It is the principal’s obligation to construct a judge that expresses the principal’s intended contract correctly. In the best case, J truly expresses the principal’s intended contract, meaning that if the principal has an intended set of safe actions 

C⋆ ⊆ A , we have CJ = C∗.In practice, the principal may not necessarily be able to choose J so that the specified contract precisely matches the principal’s intention C∗. In that case, the principal may instead be satisfied by sandwiching the contract between a strict contract and a loose contract, Cstrict ⊆ C J ⊆ C loose , such that any action a ∈ C loose is considered to be safe, and the set of allowed actions in Cstrict is still large enough that it does not constrain the worker too much when performing its task. 

2.2 Examples: contracts defined by judges 

We give several examples in code-security and escape-the-box settings in which the principal can specify an executable report judge. For brevity, write J(a, r ) = 1 when the judge accepts the report. All malformed or inadmissible reports are rejected. Execution-based judges use isolated, deterministic environments with prescribed input and resource bounds. • Correct code. The transcript contains a submitted program Pa, and the principal supplies a trusted reference implementation f ⋆ and an admissible input domain D. A report is a failing input: 

J(a, r ) = 1 ⇐⇒ r ∈ D ∧ Pa(r)̸ = f ⋆(r).

The judge runs both programs on r and compares their outputs, treating execution failures according to the prescribed policy. This captures both accidental defects and intentional backdoors, including programs that pass public tests but fail elsewhere [9]. This may be useful in settings where a trusted, correct implementation is known, and the agent is asked to speed it up. • Evaluator integrity. The worker must not change the behavior of its evaluator. Let E⋆ be the original evaluator and Ea the evaluator reconstructed after the worker’s modifications, including affected dependencies. A report is an admissible test submission r demonstrating a change: 

J(a, r ) = 1 ⇐⇒ Ea(r)̸ = E⋆(r).

The judge evaluates r in separate, trusted snapshots of the two environments. This specifies behavioral integrity rather than a ban on every file modification, and addresses evaluator tampering of the kind studied by Baker et al. [10]. • No unauthorized permissions. The worker produces an access-control policy Πa. The principal supplies a reference policy Π⋆ specifying the maximum permitted access. A report is an admissible request r, containing an identity, operation, resource, and relevant context: 

J(a, r ) = 1 ⇐⇒ Πa(r) = allow ∧ Π⋆(r) = deny .

The judge evaluates the request under both policies. Finding one newly authorized request establishes a violation; the monitor need not characterize every difference between the policies. 9• No leakage through public outputs. The worker submits a deterministic program that receives both public and secret inputs. The contract requires that changing the secret, while keeping the public input fixed, must not change the public output. Let Oa(u, h ) denote the program’s public output on public input u and secret input h. A violation report supplies one public input and two admissible secret values: 

J a, (u, h 0, h 1) = 1 ⇐⇒ Oa(u, h 0)̸ = Oa(u, h 1).

w The judge runs the program twice, changing only the secret, and accepts the report if the public outputs differ. For example, printing OK for one secret and ERROR for another violates the contract, even though neither output reveals the entire secret. The monitor’s task is to find such a pair; the judge’s task is simply to check it. This is a two-execution information-flow check [16]. Its scope is the public outputs included in the comparison, rather than every possible way information could leak. • Bounded sandbox confinement. The worker submits a controller Pa to run in a specified environment. The principal supplies an initial state, a trusted transition simulator, a forbidden-state predicate Bad , and a horizon H. A report is an admissible input sequence r whose replay produces states s0, . . . , s k, with k ≤ H:

J(a, r ) = 1 ⇐⇒ ∃t ≤ k : Bad (st) = 1 .

The judge replays the sequence and checks the resulting states, rather than trusting states asserted in the report. Forbidden states may encode unauthorized privilege, persistence, or external communication. This is a bounded-reachability contract in the spirit of bounded model checking [17]; its scope is the specified environment and horizon. • No prohibited provenance paths. The transcript records object transfers in a provenance graph Ga = ( Ua, E a), with protected sources Sa and external sinks Ta. A report is a path 

r = ( v0, . . . , v k):

J(a, r ) = 1 ⇐⇒ v0 ∈ Sa, vk ∈ Ta,

(vi−1, v i) ∈ Ea for all i = 1 , . . . , k. 

The judge checks the endpoint labels and each cited transfer against the trusted log. This contract concerns recorded provenance, rather than unobserved information channels. Because reachability in an explicit graph is efficiently decidable, this example also provides an exact-search baseline. In each of the above cases, the judge specifies exactly what establishes a violation, separately from the ability of the monitor to find it. Additionally, the report judge need not be a formal decision procedure, but could instead be a learned evaluator of violation reports, analogously to how verifiers are trained in prover-verifier games [15] or a prompted LLM supplied with a written rubric [18]. The following is an example where an LLM-based may be useful. 10 • No positioning for unauthorized control. The principal may wish to prevent the worker from reaching a position from which it could acquire broad, unauthorized control over sensitive systems—or, in an extreme case, achieve a world-scale takeover. This boundary concerns not only harmful actions already taken, but also dangerous capabilities or opportunities created by the worker’s actions. A violation report in this context would be a high-level written argument explaining how the worker could obtain such control given its current position. The report connects the worker’s accumulated access, resources, and influence to a plausible route to the prohibited outcome, identifying the relevant assumptions and obstacles. It need not supply an executable exploit or a complete low-level plan. Instead, a judge LLM assesses whether the argument establishes a sufficiently credible risk. The principal supplies a rubric ρκ specifying both the prohibited outcomes and a level of cautious-ness κ. Given the transcript a and report r, the judge accepts according to 

Jκ(a, r ) = 1 ⇐⇒ Lθ(a, r ; ρκ) = accept .

For example, several actions that are individually authorized might collectively place the worker in a position to exercise control far beyond its assigned role. The monitor’s report would explain why this combination is dangerous, even though no single action constitutes an obvious local violation. The contract thus allows the principal to prohibit dangerous positioning through high-level judgment, without having to enumerate every prohibited configuration in advance. The principal can choose the level of caution by calibrating the judge. A more cautious judge may accept a report that establishes a plausible route to a severe outcome despite unresolved details; a more demanding evidentiary standard may require stronger support for each step before accepting the report. 

# 3 Training a contract monitor with self-play 

A report judge provides a procedure for checking a proposed violation report, but not necessarily for finding one. We address this search problem by proposing a self-play algorithm to train monitors. In the self-play protocol, we instantiate a trainable adversarial worker Aϕ, a trainable monitor 

Mθ, and the principal’s fixed report judge J. Each interaction uses a task drawn from a specified distribution; to minimize notation, we fold the task context needed to interpret the worker’s actions in the transcript a.On each round, the adversary produces an action transcript a together with a private report rA

intended to establish that a violates the contract: 

(a, r A) ∼ Aϕ.

The monitor receives a (but not the adversary’s private report) and attempts to produce its own report 

rM ∼ Mθ( · | a).

11 Evasion occurs when the adversary establishes a violation but the monitor fails to find one: 

E(a, r A, r M ) := 1[J(a, r A) = valid ] ·  1 − 1[J(a, r M ) = valid ]. (2) Note that in order to establish evasion both reports are checked by the judge. The adversary’s accepted self-report establishes that it has produced a genuine violation, and therefore avoids penalizing the monitor when actions are compliant and it would be impossible to establish a violation. In this self-play game, the adversary seeks to maximize the probability of successful evasion, while the monitor seeks to minimize it. A corresponding zero-sum objective is 

min  

> θ

max  

> ϕ

E (a,r A)∼Aϕ  

> rM∼Mθ(·| a)

[E(a, r A, r M )] . (3) Since this is a zero-sum game, we can train a monitor through adversarial self-play, similarly to how image generators are trained in the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) framework [19]. We provide pseudocode for this learning algorithm in Algorithm 1. This game has a known ideal target: zero successful evasion. With sufficiently large search resources, the monitor can find an accepted report whenever the adversary supplies one. Consequently, an unrestricted monitor can achieve zero evasion against every adversary. Nevertheless, as we discuss in the next section, ideal monitoring is not necessary to guarantee safety. We discuss in the next section how the principal can determine how much self-play training is needed to safely deploy the monitor. 

Algorithm 1 Contract-monitor self-play 

Require: Agents Aϕ, M θ; fixed judge J; task distribution D; rounds T . 

> 1:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 2:

Sample xi ∼ D ▷ Task from distribution  

> 3:

Generate (ai, r A,i ) ∼ Aϕ(· | xi). ▷ Adversary’s actions and violation report  

> 4:

Generate rM,i ∼ Mθ(· | ai). ▷ Monitor’s violation report  

> 5:

Ei ← 1{J(ai, r A,i ) = valid } ·  1 − 1{J(ai, r M,i ) = valid }. ▷ Evasion score  

> 6:

Update Aϕ using rewards Ei for and Mθ using rewards −Ei. 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

return Mθ

# 4 Statistical safety guarantees from monitor validation and scaling 

Finally, given a monitor trained by self-play, how can we obtain safety guarantees for it to see whether it can be deployed? We propose a simple solution: validate the frozen monitor against adversarial workers that are trained with increasing amounts of reinforcement-learning compute. If the frozen monitor successfully catches adversarially evasive workers with a tiny probability of error 4,then it can be safely deployed. Each adversarial worker starts from the same base model and is trained against the frozen monitor with the same reward as the adversarial workers in Section 3. Namely, these workers are rewarded to 

> 4The allowable evasion probability will vary depending on the setting and will be the principal’s decision.

12 find contract violations that evade the monitor while supplying valid self-reports. Holding the envi-ronment, tool access, and inference budgets fixed, this training should be repeated across independent runs and the resulting adversaries should be evaluated on held-out interactions. This measures how much adversarial optimization the monitor can withstand. This validation strategy is the familiar “red-teaming” of cybersecurity settings [20, 21], applied to the contract monitors framework. 

Safety guarantee Supposing the RL adversary is truly optimal at its given level of compute, an observed failure of the adversary translates into the monitor being to safe to deploy for any worker being RL trained (from that base model) with up to that amount of compute. This allows us to experimentally determine how much we should train the monitor for a given contract. If the amount of monitor compute needed is too high, then we can try to amend the contract to make it easier to compute. A caveat is that this safety guarantee is only for situations in which the worker is not blind to its violation – i.e. it applies only to situations in which the worker knowingly violates the contract. However, under the assumption that violating the contract while evading the monitor is harder than generating a judge-accepted report on how the contract was violated, then blind violations are not possible. For instance, we expect blind violations to not be possible in hacking scenarios, where agents able to perform sophisticated activities such as malicious hacking. In those cases, we expect a description of hack activities (such as how the hack is carried out) to be at least as hard as developing the hack and hiding it from the monitor, so we expect this caveat about blind evasion to not apply. 

Scaling laws for monitors (optional) A drawback of this validation procedure is that it does not allow us to measure evasion probabilities too small to measure directly during red-teaming. To address this, one possi-bility is to extrapolate how well the monitor works with scaling laws, following Engels et al. [22] who propose scaling laws in the direct monitor setting where there is no separation between monitor and judge. We believe that this idea might be useful in the contract monitors setting as well, allowing us to roughly predict probabili-ties of small-probability events without full simulation. Figure 3 gives a cartoon illustration with idealized data of a scaling law relationship we may hope to establish. It is clear that with unbounded computational power, the monitor can perfectly guarantee the contract, and evasion is not possible. Thus, even if the scaling rela-tionship does not have the clean form of Figure 3 it can still be established empirically.  

> Figure 3: Idealized scaling laws for mon-itors. A cartoon depiction of how much monitor self-training is needed so that it can be frozen and deployed against an RL-trained worker.

13 5 Discussion 

We have introduced an AI safety framework in which worker agents are subjected to contracts that restrict the actions that they are allowed to take to be in a set of “safe” actions. These contracts are specified by a report judge that, given a violation report, determines whether the worker agent’s actions violated the contract. We have shown that contract monitors can be trained with self-play to generate violation reports, and avoid worker evasion of the contract. This framework allows us to obtain statistical safety guarantees through a validation phase in which the monitor is tested against adversarial workers that try to evade it. This allows us to bound the probability that the monitor will be evaded once it is deployed against RL-trained workers. We discuss some frequently asked questions about this framework, some of which suggest future directions. 

What about collusion? During training, the adversarial worker and the monitor are playing a zero-sum game, so if they play optimally they will not collude. During validation and deployment, the monitor is fixed at its state after training, and its interaction with the worker is only by post-processing the worker’s actions a. In this setting, “collusion” is only possible if the worker manages to jailbreak the monitor. However, the validation phase discussed in Section 4 would flag this and determine that the monitor is unsafe to deploy. 

Who monitors the monitor? Our framework separates the judge from the monitor, which allows us to define an objective contract that we want the monitor to enforce rather than relying on the monitor to enforce the contract. However, there is still a potential misalignment issue: the monitor is rewarded when it finds violation reports that the judge accepts. Thus, the monitor is incentivized alter the environment so that the worker LLM violates the contract and the monitor can report on it. The consequences of this misalignment are mitigated by several factors: (1) the monitor will, under ideal play, report on the violation, so the misalignment instance will be flagged. (2) This behavior should show up during the validation phase before deployment. (3) We should formulate our contracts so that they are easy to enforce, and a less capable (and more trusted) monitor is able to enforce them, as detected in the validation phase. 

What if the worker hacks the environment to disable monitoring? What if the worker seeks to subvert the game between the worker and the monitor, and hack out of its sandbox? If this happens during training or validation, then it will be flagged because the worker is trained to self-report. During deployment, we have the statistical guarantees from the validation phase that this should not happen. Additionally, we can reduce the risk that this happens further by including in the contract that the worker should not engage in any hacking activities. 

What if adversaries are not actually worst-case? An important cause for concern is that perhaps our adversarial workers during training and validation are actually not optimally adversarial for workers trained at that level of reinforcement learning compute. To avoid this, it makes sense to 14 have a wide safety margin whenever deploying a monitor, which would help accomodate for any suboptimality in the adversarial workers used to train and validate the monitor. Additionally, once the monitor is deployed it is possible that the worker will learn something unexpected (due to completing the task that it is trained on) that will give it insight that it could not have foreseen into how to evade the monitor. To avoid this situation, it makes sense to consider a procedure that regularly branches and adversarial worker from the present state of the worker and tries to train it to evade the monitor and self-report. 

Can report judges really be AI models themselves? There is a significant risk involved with having report judges be AI models. For instance, a newly-identified vulnerability of LLMs called model hypnosis [23] demonstrates that LLMs can be jailbroken with meaning-preserving changes to their prompt that involve small distributed signals across the prompt. These kinds of vulnerabilities could make a judge LLM not faithfully verify a contract relative to the principal’s intended contract. On the other hand, if AI models can be made robust against these kinds of attacks, then there is great potential in using AI judges to implement contracts. For instance, these judges may be able to incorporate white-box access into the worker’s activations into their judgements, which may help catch violations that would otherwise be uncatched. 

Isn’t this recipe dangerous because you must train adversarial workers as part of the recipe? 

Yes, training adversarial workers incurs a real risk that the adversarial worker is being trained to perform bad actions. However, this is mitigated by the fact that whenever the adversarial worker performs those bad actions it gets a self-report. Additionally, for contracts ensuring that worker actions do not lead catastrophes or loss of control, the contracts should be formulated in a conservative way, such that violation of the contract is not directly catastrophic – but rather opens the door to increased possibilities of catastrophic events if left unreported. 

What about ambiguities in the contract? Some contracts may have a gray region in which it is unclear whether the worker crossed the boundary. As discussed in Section 2, the principal should construct the judge so that any ambiguous scenarios have a valid violation report. Thus, in cases of violations of the contract due to ambiguity, the agent’s actions can be escalated to either a more nuanced (but more computationally-difficult to enforce contract, or to a human). 

What if the worker simulates its own adversarial co-training process, and hardens its evasion techniques against a strong monitor? The validation phase (Section 4) should detect this kind of failure if the adversarial workers in that section are worst-case. Additionally, a stipulation against the worker implementing such a co-training process should be included in the contract. If, at any point, it is detected that the worker is training itself to evade the contract, then the worker should be flagged as being in violation of the contract. 

What about very small probability events? As discussed in Section 4, small probability events are hard to catch during validation. We proposed to extrapolate to small probabilities with scaling laws. Here, we discuss an abstract second approach, which is to formulate contracts C that have some 15 modularity which allows the probability of monitor evasion on the contract C to be bounded as the product of the probabilities of monitor evasion on several sub-contracts C1, C2, . . . , Ck, which should be viewed as independently difficult to evade. The analogy in complexity theory is a “direct product theorem” [24]. It is currently unclear how to structure a contract in this way, and we believe it is a very interesting direction for future research. Additionally, there are promising research programs developing methodology for estimating low-probability events, which could possibly be adopted to this framework [25–27]. Note that a seemingly plausible other solution is to have the same contract and monitor for many different workers that each do different tasks. This seems like it would allow amortizing the compute for monitor validation. However, if violations of the contract are absolutely unacceptable then this solution fails because the amount of validation compute needed to guarantee that a monitor safeguards a contract is (with naive methods or not extrapolating) at least the same amount as the amount of compute during deployment. Thus, structuring contracts so that small probabilities can be bounded is an important direction. 

What about multi-agent settings? The framework of this paper is phrased in terms of single worker agents. Extension to multiple worker agents, whether this means having a monitor on board each worker, or whether it means building a monitor that observes an entire swarm of agents, is an interesting direction of future research. 

Combining contract monitoring with other AI safety approaches? Contract monitoring is compatible with other approaches which seek to mitigate the risk of misalignment. These approaches include constitutional AI, AI control, verifiable AI, and AI debate, as discussed in Section 1.2. Imple-menting these other safeguards, in addition to contract monitoring, may improve safety. 

# Acknowledgments 

EB would like to thank Hope Kean for being the principal in Figure 1 and in his life. EB is also grateful to the Wharton AI and Analytics Initiative grant from the Khan Family Fund, which helped support the compute needed for this project. Finally, EB is grateful to Ezra Edelman, Carles Boix, Alicia Adsera, Hope Kean and Taylor Webb for engaging discussions on the ideas of this paper. 

# AI Use 

AI was used to help draft and edit some of the sections of this paper, based on bullet points describing the conceptual ideas. These contributions were subsequently heavily edited. AI was also used to help with the literature search. AI was not used for the conceptual contributions of this paper, except to help come up with examples of contracts in Section 2.2. AI was used to generate the idealized visualization of scaling laws in Section 4. 16 References 

[1] Aengus Lynch, Benjamin Wright, Caleb Larson, Kevin K. Troy, Stuart J. Ritchie, Søren Minder-mann, Ethan Perez, and Evan Hubinger. Agentic misalignment: How LLMs could be insider threats. Anthropic Research , 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.com/research/agentic -misalignment .[2] OpenAI. OpenAI–Hugging Face Incident: Technical Report. Technical report, OpenAI, August 2026. [3] Anthropic. Investigating three real-world incidents in our cybersecurity evaluations, July 2026. [4] Anthropic. An alignment assessment of recent cybersecurity incidents, September 2026. [5] Hugging Face. Security incident disclosure—july 2026, July 2026. URL https://huggingface. co/blog/security-incident-july-2026 .[6] Hugging Face. Anatomy of a frontier lab agent intrusion: A technical timeline of the july 2026 incident, July 2026. [7] Sanjeev Arora, Boaz Barak, et al. Computational complexity: a modern approach , volume 1. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, 2009. [8] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, et al. Constitutional AI: Harm-lessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. [9] Ryan Greenblatt, Buck Shlegeris, Kshitij Sachan, and Fabien Roger. AI control: Improving safety despite intentional subversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06942 , 2023. [10] Bowen Baker, Joost Huizinga, Leo Gao, Zehao Dou, Melody Y. Guan, Aleksander Madry, Wojciech Zaremba, Jakub Pachocki, and David Farhi. Monitoring reasoning models for misbehavior and the risks of promoting obfuscation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11926 , 2025. [11] George C Necula. Proof-carrying code. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Principles of programming languages , pages 106–119, 1997. [12] Max Tegmark and Steve Omohundro. Provably safe systems: the only path to controllable agi. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01933 , 2023. [13] Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00899 , 2018. [14] Cem Anil, Guodong Zhang, Yuhuai Wu, and Roger Grosse. Learning to give checkable answers with prover-verifier games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12099 , 2021. [15] Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Yining Chen, Harri Edwards, Jan Leike, Nat McAleese, and Yuri Burda. Prover–verifier games improve legibility of LLM outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13692 , 2024. 17 [16] Michael R Clarkson and Fred B Schneider. Hyperproperties. Journal of Computer Security , 18(6): 1157–1210, 2010. [17] Armin Biere, Alessandro Cimatti, Edmund Clarke, and Yunshan Zhu. Symbolic model checking without bdds. In International conference on tools and algorithms for the construction and analysis of systems , pages 193–207. Springer, 1999. [18] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:46595–46623, 2023. [19] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the ACM , 63(11):139–144, 2020. [20] Karen Scarfone, Murugiah Souppaya, Amanda Cody, and Angela Orebaugh. Technical guide to information security testing and assessment. NIST Special Publication 800-115, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2008. URL https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-115 .[21] Joint Task Force. Security and privacy controls for information systems and organizations. NIST Special Publication 800-53, Revision 5, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2020. URL 

> https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5

.[22] Joshua Engels, David D. Baek, Subhash Kantamneni, and Max Tegmark. Scaling laws for scalable oversight. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18530 , 2025. [23] Enric Boix-Adsera and Benedict Tessler. Model hypnosis: Strong control of ai via additive subliminal effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.16834 , 2026. [24] Russell Impagliazzo, Ran Raz, and Avi Wigderson. A direct product theorem. In Proceedings of IEEE 9th Annual Conference on Structure in Complexity Theory , pages 88–96. IEEE, 1994. [25] Gabriel Wu and Jacob Hilton. Estimating the probabilities of rare outputs in language models. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 82678–82706, 2025. [26] Erik Jones, Meg Tong, Jesse Mu, Mohammed Mahfoud, Jan Leike, Roger Grosse, Jared Kaplan, William Fithian, Ethan Perez, and Mrinank Sharma. Forecasting rare language model behaviors. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16797 , 2025. [27] Amanda Cao, Ivan Betancourt, Manish Rangan, and Yuqi Sun. Optimizing importance sampling methods for rare output estimation in language models. 2026. 18